GOVERNMENT OF KERALA
THE KERALA SERVICE RULES
VOLUME I
PART  I & II
EIGHTH EDITION
2016
ISSUED BY THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF KERALA
FINANCE DEPARTMENT
Official website: www.finance.kerala.gov.in
1PART I
PAY,  LEA VE,  JOINING TIME,  Etc.KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
2CHAPTER  I
GENERAL  SCOPE
1.            (i)    These rules may be called the Kerala Service Rules.
                 (ii)    The rules in Part  I  and Part II shall be deemed to have come into force with
effect from 1st November 1959 and those in Part  III shall be deemed to have
come into force from 1st November 1956.
2.           Subject to the provisions of Rule 3,-
                (i)    The rules in Part  II relating to Travelling Allowance shall apply to every
person in the whole time employment of the Government (other than aperson so employed in the contingent or work establishment);
          (ii)  The remaining rules shall apply to every person in the whole time
employment of the Government (other than a person so employed inthe contingent or work establishment),-
                       (a)   who was not in the service of the Government of  Travancore-Cochin
or  the Government of Madras on 31
st October 1956, or
                    (b)   who was in the service of the Government of Travancore-Cochin or
the Government of Madras on 31st October 1956 and who continued
to be in the service of the Government of Kerala, but has opted to begoverned by these rules in accordance with such conditions as maybe laid down by the Government in this behalf; or
                  (c)   who was absorbed to Government service on or after 1
st November
1956, but who prior to such date was in the service of any quasi-Government or other institution and whose appointment andconditions of service were governed by any law or rule made underany law for the  time being in force, if such person exercises his
option to be governed by these rules, subject to such conditions asmay be laid down by Government in this behalf.CHAP I ] [ RULES 1-2 GENERAL SCOPE
3*[G O(P) No.1082/1987/Fin., Dated 16/12/1987]CHAP I ] [ RULES 2-3 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
              Ruling
              *The  rules in Part II, Kerala Service Rules relating to Travelling Allowances
shall apply to the persons appointed to the service of the Governmenttemporarily under Rule 9 of Part II of the Kerala State and Subordinate ServiceRules also.
3.   (i)     These rules shall not apply to,-
             (a)  persons for whose appointment and conditions of employment special
provision is made by or under any law for the time being in force;
               (b)  persons in respect of whose conditions of  service, pay and allowances,
pension, leave or any of them, special provision has been made byagreement entered into before these rules were made or entered intothereafter in pursuance of the provisions of Rule 8:
          
       Provided that in respect of any matter not covered by the provisions special
to him, his service or his post, these rules shall apply to any person comingwithin the scope of clauses (a)  and  (b)  above, to whom but for thoseclauses the rules would otherwise apply.
   (ii)   Notwithstanding anything contained in Rule 2 the Government may, by
notification in the Gazette, exclude wholly or in part from the operation ofthese rules any officer or any class of such officers to whom the Governmentshall declare that the rules cannot suitably be applied, and these rules shallthereupon to the extent of such exclusion, cease to apply accordingly.
   ** Note .- These rules as a whole shall not apply to the persons appointed to
the service of the Government temporarily under Rule 9 of Part II of theKerala State and Subordinate Service Rules, 1958, except to the extentspecified by the Government.
**[G O(P) No. 77/1987/Fin., Dated 22/01/1987]
4**[G O(P) No. 68/1965/Fin., Dated 16/02/1965]CHAP I ] GENERAL SCOPE [ RULES 3-7
              Government Decision
                **The direct recruits to the personal staff of the Ministers will be governed
by the service conditions specified in the Special Rules applicable to themand in respect of any matter not covered by the provisions in such Special
Rules, the provisions in the Kerala Service Rules will apply.
4.              If any doubt arises as to whether these rules apply to any person, the matter
shall be referred to the Government and the decision of the Government
shall be final.
 5.              Nothing in these rules or in any rule made thereunder shall operate to deprive
any person of any right or privilege to which he is entitled,-
                 (a)     by or under any law, or
               (b)    by the terms of any contract or agreement subsisting between such
person and Government on the date these rules come into force.
6.            Subject to the provisions of Rule 5, nothing in these rules or any rule made
under these rules shall operate to affect to the disadvantage of any personholding a substantive post under Government to whom these rules apply,
the conditions of service in respect of pay, leave, allowances, pension or
any other matter which are applicable to him-
                (a)    on the date these rules came into force, or
             (b)   by virtue of any order or rule made by the Government, unless such
person gives his consent.
7.          Where Government are satisfied that the operation of any rule under these
rules causes undue hardship in any particular case, the Government may
dispense with or relax the requirements of that rule to such extent and subjectto such conditions as they may consider necessary for dealing with the case
in a just and equitable manner.
5CHAP I ] [ RULES 8-9 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
8.              When in the opinion of the Government, special provisions inconsistent with
any of these rules or of any rules made thereunder are required in respect ofconditions of service, pay and allowances,  leave and pension or any ofthem, with reference to any particular post, it shall be open to the Government,notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, to provide by agreementwith  the  person appointed to such post for any of the matters in respect ofwhich in the opinion of the Government special provisions are required to bemade, and to the extent to which such provisions are made in the agreement,nothing in these rules or in any rules made thereunder shall apply to anyperson so appointed in respect of any matter for which provision is made inthe agreement :
            Provided that in every agreement made it shall further be provided that in
respect of any matter in respect of which no  provision has been made in theagreement, the provisions of these rules or of rules made thereunder shallapply. (For model form of agreement See Appendix I).
9.              The Government may delegate to any of its officers subject to any conditions
which it may think fit to impose any power conferred upon it by these ruleswith the following exceptions :-
                  (a)   power to make rules;
                 (b)   [Deleted];
               (c)   power to regulate the terms and conditions for grant of compensatory
allowances;
                (d)    to determine the standard rent of buildings and the rent recoverable from
an officer occupying the residence;
           (e)  to remit leave and pension contributions in respect of an officer
transferred on foreign service; and
               (f)    to permit an officer on foreign service to receive pension or gratuity from
foreign employer.
6CHAP I ] GENERAL SCOPE [ RULES 10-11
10.      No powers may be exercised or delegated under these rules except after
consultation with the Finance Department. It shall be open to that Department
to prescribe, by general or special order, cases in which its consent may be
presumed to have been given.
11.           The Government reserve to themselves the power to modify these rules as may
from time to time seem expedient and to interpret them in case of doubt.
              Ruling
                 An officer’s claim to pay and allowances is regulated by the rules in force at
the time in respect of which the pay and allowances are earned; to leave, by
the rules in force at the time the leave is applied for and granted; and topension, by the rules in force at the time when the officer resigns or is
discharged from the service of the State.
           Persons governed by the Kerala Service Rules who were on leave on the
crucial date, i.e. 1
st November 1959, the leave having been sanctioned in
good faith and availed of from a date prior to 1st November 1959 will be
treated to have come over to the leave rules in the Kerala Service Rules onthe expiry of the first spell of leave originally sanctioned.  Any further
extension of such leave after 1
st November 1959 should be regulated only in
terms of the rules in Kerala Service Rules. No arrears will, however, be paid,nor amounts drawn in excess recovered as a result of such readjustment of
leave.
7*[G O(P) No. 491/1975/Fin., Dated 24/10/1975]CHAP II ] [ RULE 12 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
CHAPTER II
DEFINITIONS
12.       Unless there be something repugnant in the subject or context the terms
defined in this chapter are used in the rules in the sense here explained :-
        (1)    Actual Travelling Expenses .- means the actual cost of transporting an officer
and his personal luggage including charges for ferry and other tolls and for
carriage of camp equipment, if necessary. It does not include charges for
hotels, travellers bungalows or refreshments or for the carriage of stores orconveyances or for presents to coachmen and the like, or any allowance for
such incidental losses or expenses as the breakage of crockery, wear and tear
of furniture and the employment of servants.
        (2)     Apprentice .- means a person deputed for training with a view to employment in
Government service, who draws pay at monthly rates from Government during
such training, but is not employed in or against a substantive vacancy in the
cadre of a department.
      (3)      Audit Officer .- means the Head of the Office of Accounts and Audit subordinate
to the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, whether designated as
Comptroller or Accountant General or by any other designation.
    (3A)    *Average Pay .-  [Deleted].
       (4)    Cadre .- means the strength of a service or part of a service sanctioned as a
separate unit.
     (5)   Compensatory  Allowance .- means an allowance granted to meet personal
expenditure necessitated by the special circumstances in which duty is
performed. It includes Travelling Allowance.
    (5A)    Competent  Authority .- Competent authority in respect of any officer, in so far
as any power delegated under these rules is concerned, means the authority
8*[G O(P) No. 366/1976/Fin., Dated 26/11/1976]CHAP II ] DEFINITIONS [ RULE 12
to which such power has been delegated and where no such specific
delegation has been made, the competent authority is, unless otherwise stated,
the authority in whom the power to appoint such officer has been or is vestedfrom time to time by the State Government.
       (6)      Day .- means  a calendar day, beginning and ending at midnight; but an absence
from headquarters which does not exceed 24 hours shall be reckoned for allpurposes as one day, at whatever hours the absence begins or ends.
     (7)     Duty  .- Duty includes-
                (i)    Service as a probationer or apprentice, provided that such service is
followed by confirmation.
              (ii)    Joining time.
              (iii)    A course of instruction or training which an officer undergoes specially
ordered by Government to be treated as duty.
                  Note 1 .- A student, stipendiary or otherwise, who is entitled to be appointed
to the service of Government on passing through a course of training ata  University, College or School shall unless in any case it be otherwise
expressly provided in the terms of his appointment, be treated as on
duty during the interval between the satisfactory completion of thecourse and his assumption of duties.
   Note 2 .- An officer required or permitted to attend an obligatory departmental
examination may be treated as on duty during the day or days of theexamination and during the reasonable time required for the journey, if
any, to and from the place of examination.
               Explanation.                        *The term ‘obligatory departmental examination’ means-
                 (i)   any test a pass in which is prescribed for the successful completion of
probation or training of an officer, whether recruited direct or by transfer;
9CHAP II ] [ RULE 12 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
                (ii)   any test a pass in which is prescribed for the purpose of making an
officer eligible for increment or for confirmation in any post;
                 (iii)   any test a pass in which is prescribed for promotion to any higher post
coming in the  line of promotion in the department concerned ;
               (iv)   any test a pass in which is prescribed as a qualification for continuance in
the post;
                (v)   any test a pass in which is newly prescribed for persons already in the
service concerned.
  Note 3 .- The period spent on training by officers who are reservists of the
Defence Forces and the period of their journey to and from the trainingcentre may be treated as duty.
              Ruling
             In all cases of deputation of officers for a course of instruction or training
under these rules, the period of such training, if treated as duty under sub-clause (iii) of the above rule, should be specified as such in the orderssanctioning such deputation. A separate clause that the period will count forincrement, leave and pension is not necessary in such cases. In case wherean officer selected for training is found  unsuitable on medical examinationor otherwise, the period spent by him in India for journey for medicalexamination, etc. in connection with the training will be treated as leave andno Travelling Allowance will be allowed for such journeys
    Note  4 .- 
†When a Government Servant on return from leave, training, foreign
service or on termination of previous appointment, has compulsorilyto wait for orders of  posting, the interval between the date of reportand the date on which he takes charge of his duties shall be treated as‘duty’ provided that the interval between the date of receipt of orders
†[G O(P) No.475/1975/Fin., Dated 09/10/1975]
10*[Omitted G O(P) No.78/2007/Fin., Dated 28/02/2007]
**[G O(P) No. 211/1982/Fin., Dated 05/05/1982]CHAP II ] DEFINITIONS [ RULE 12
and his assumption of duties shall not in any case exceed the amount
of joining time admissible under Rule 125 (a). During such period of
duty, he will be entitled to pay according to Rule 26. Avoidable delaycaused in giving posting orders in such cases shall render the
authorities concerned, liable for the excess expenditure, if any, caused
thereby.
  * [Omitted]
   Note 6 .- When a Government Servant is deputed by Government to participate
in a Civil service Tournament as a member of the team or to participatein the coaching camps organised in connection thereto, the period spent
for participation in such tournaments/coaching camps, including the
time taken for to and fro journeys will be treated as duty.
              Explanation.-
                          **The term ‘Civil Service Tournament’ shall mean India Civil Services
Tournaments organised by (a) the Central Civil Service Sports ControlBoard,  (b)  State Governments on behalf of the above Board and  (c)
Sports Councils or Associations authorised by the State Government,
on behalf of the Central Civil Service Sports Control Board.
              The note shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1
st July 1980.
      (8)    Fee .- means a recurring or non-recurring payment to an officer from a source
other than the General Revenues whether made directly to the officer orindirectly through the intermediary of Government but does not included-
                  (a)      unearned income, such as income from property, dividends and interests
on securities ; and
              (b)    income from literary, cultural or artistic efforts, if such efforts are not
aided by the knowledge acquired by the officer in the course of his
service.
11CHAP II ] [ RULE 12 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
     (9)   Foreign Service .- means service in which an officer receives his pay with
sanction of Government from any source other than the Consolidated Fund
of India or of a State.
   (10)   General Revenues .- General Revenues of Kerala include the Consolidated
Fund, the Contingency fund and the Public Account of Kerala and excludethe revenues of Local Funds.
    (11)    Government .- means the Government of Kerala.
    (12)    Gratuity .- (See Pension)
    (13)    Heads of Departments .- The term includes-
             (a)  Officers who have been declared by the Government to be Heads of
Departments. ( See Appendix II)
                   (b)   Any other authority to which the Government may delegate the powers
of a Head of Department.
    (14)    Holiday .- means-
                 (a)    a holiday prescribed or notified by or under section 25 of the Negotiable
Instruments Act, 1881; and
           (b)   in relation to any particular office, a day on which such office is
ordered by notification of Government in the Gazette to be closedfor the transaction of Government business without reserve orqualification.
     (15)    Honorarium .- means a recurring or non-recurring payment granted to an
officer from the General Revenues of the State as remuneration for specialwork of an occasional or intermittent character.
   (16)    Joining Time .- means the time allowed to an officer to join a new post or
travel to or from a station to which  he is posted.
12*[G O(P) No. 1060/1979/Fin., Dated 06/12/1979]
†[G O(P) No.626/93/Fin., Dated 04/10/1993]CHAP II ] DEFINITIONS [ RULE 12
 (16 A)   *Last Grade Service .- means service in any post included in the Kerala Last
Grade Service constituted by the Special Rules for the Kerala Last GradeService, published under G.O.(P) 82/Public (Rules) Department, dated the 8
th
March 1966, in Part I of the Kerala Gazette No.14, dated the 5th April 1966, as
amended from time to time, and includes †all other posts carrying the lowest
scale of pay in the schedule of pay scales in force from time to time and
service in any post declared by the Government  to be a post in the  Last
Grade Service.
      (17)    Leave Salary .- means the monthly amount paid by Government to an officer
on leave.
     (18)    Lien .- means the title of an officer to hold substantively, either immediately
or on termination of a period or periods of absence, a permanent post to
which he has been appointed substantively.
     (19)   Local Fund .- means-
                   (a)    revenues administered by bodies which by law or rule having the force
of law come under the control of Government, whether in regard toproceedings generally or to specific matters, such as the sanctioning of
their budgets; sanction to the creation or filling up of particular posts,
or the enactment of leave, pension or similar rules;  and
                    (b)     the revenues of any body which may be specially notified by the Government
as such.
     (20)    Ministerial Officer .- means an officer of a subordinate service whose duties
are entirely clerical, and any other class of officer specially defined as such
by general or special orders of Government.
    (21)    Month .- means a calendar month.  In calculating a period expressed in terms
of months and days, complete calendar months, irrespective of the number of
13CHAP II ] [ RULE 12 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
days in each, should first be calculated and the odd number of days calculated
subsequently.
  Note .- Whenever it is necessary to calculate a period  in calendar months,
the period shall be taken to end either on the day of the monthcorresponding to the day before the day on which the period begins or
if there is no such corresponding day in the month, then on the last
day of the month.
  Example.- A period of six calendar months beginning on the 28
th February
ends on the 27th August, 31st March ends on the 30th September, 30th or
31st August ends on the 28th February or 29th February, if leap year.
               In calculating a period of 3 months and 20 days from 25th January, 3 months
should be taken as ending on the 24th April and the 20 days on 14th May. In the
same way the period from 30th January to 2nd March should be reckoned as 1
month and 2 days, because one month from 30th January ends on 28th February.
A period of one month and 29 days commencing from 1st January will expire in
an ordinary year (in which February is a month of 28 days) on the last day of
February because a period of 29 days cannot obviously mean to exceed a
period of full calendar month and leave for two months from 1st January would
end on the last day of  February. The same would be the case if February were
a month of  29 days or if the broken period were 28 days (in an ordinary year).
    (22)    Officiate .- An officer officiates in a post when he performs the duties of a
post on which another person holds a lien. The appointing authority may, if
it thinks fit, appoint an officer to officiate in a vacant post on which no other
officer holds a lien.
     (23)   Pay .- means the amount drawn monthly by an officer as-
                 (i)   the pay, other than special pay or pay granted in view of his personal
qualifications, which has been sanctioned for a post held by himsubstantively or in an officiating capacity or to which he is entitled by
reason of his position in a cadre, and
14CHAP II ] DEFINITIONS [ RULE 12
                 (ii)  personal pay and special pay, and
             (iii)  any other emoluments which may be specially classed as pay by the
Government.
    (24)    Pension .-Except when the term ‘Pension’ is used in contradistinction to
gratuity or ‘Death-cum-retirement gratuity’, ‘Pension’ includes ‘gratuity’and ‘Death-cum-retirement gratuity’.
    (25)   Permanent Post .- means a post carrying a definite rate of pay sanctioned
without limit of time.
     (26)   Personal Pay .- means additional pay granted to an officer-
             (a)   to save him from loss of substantive pay in respect of a permanent
post due to a revision of pay or to any reduction of such substantivepay otherwise than as a disciplinary measure ; or
             (b)    in exceptional circumstances, on other personal considerations.
   Note .- All cases in which it is proposed to grant personal pay under clause
(b)  of the above rule should be referred to the Finance Department bythe Administrative Department concerned. No case will be entertainedwhich is not of an entirely exceptional character and in submittingcases for the grant of personal pay, this should be carefully borne inmind.
   (27)   Presumptive Pay of a Post .- When used with reference to any particular
Government servant, means the pay to which he would be entitled if he heldthe post substantively and were performing its duties; but it does not includespecial pay unless the Government servant, performs or discharges the workor responsibility in consideration of which the special pay was sanctioned.
  Note.- The first part of the definition is intended to facilitate the use of  the term
in relation to an officer who has been absent from a post  for some time butstill retains a lien on it.
15CHAP II ] [ RULE 12 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
  (28)   Probationer .-means an officer employed on probation in or against a
substantive vacancy in the cadre of a department.
  Note 1 .-The term ‘Probationer’ does not cover an officer who holds
substantively a permanent post in  a cadre and is appointed  ‘onprobation’ to another post.
   Note 2 .- No person appointed substantively to a permanent post in a cadre
is a probationer unless definite conditions  of  probation have beenattached to his appointment such as the condition that he must remain
on probation pending the passing of certain examinations.
  Note 3 .-The status of a probationer is to be considered as having the attributes
of a substantive status except where the rules prescribe otherwise.
 Note 4 .-The instructions in Notes 1 and 2 above are to be taken as
complementary and not as mutually exclusive. Taken together, they
contain the essence of the tests for determining when an officer should
be regarded as a “Probationer” or as merely “on Probation”, irrespectiveof whether he is already a permanent officer or is merely an officer
without a lien on any permanent post. While a probationer is one
appointed in or against a post substantively vacant with definiteconditions of probation, a person on probation is one appointed to a
post (not necessarily vacant substantively) for determining his fitness
for eventual substantive appointment to that post.
   (29)    Public Conveyance .-means a train, steamer, bus, boat or other conveyance
which plies regularly for the conveyance of passengers.
    (30)      Qualify  - ‘Qualify’ and ‘Count’ means qualify and count for pension, from the
General Revenues or for leave of absence, as the case may be.
    (31)    Special Pay .- means an addition of the nature of pay to the emoluments of a
post or of an officer granted in consideration of the following :-
16*[G O(P) No. 393/1975/Fin., Dated 30/08/1975]CHAP II ] DEFINITIONS [ RULE 12
                (a)     where a post would call for a higher scale of pay in view of the additional
and/or higher responsibilities attached to it, or
               (b)     where the nature of work is specially arduous ;
                                                          or              (c)    where an officer has to attend to work in addition to normal duties
attached to his post.
  Note  .- *When special pay is granted in lieu of a higher time-scale of pay
such special pay will count for purposes for fixation of pay on promotionto a higher post provided the Officer was drawing it continuously for  aminimum period of three years on the date of promotion. Special pay ina tenure post or special pay drawn on deputation will not, however, beconsidered for such fixation of pay.
     (32)    Subsistence Allowance .-means a monthly grant made to an officer who is not
in receipt of  pay or leave salary.
   (33)   Substantive Pay .- means the pay other than special pay, personal pay or
emoluments classed as pay by Government under Rule 12 (23) (ii) and  (iii)above to which an officer is entitled on account of a post to which he has beenappointed substantively or by reason of  his substantive position in a cadre.
  Note  .-When a special pay is granted in lieu of a higher time scale, such
special pay will also count as substantive pay, provided the officerholds a lien on the post to which the special pay is attached.
     (34)    Temporary Post .-means a post carrying a definite rate of pay sanctioned for
a limited  time.
     (35)   Time-scale of Pay .- means pay which, subject to any conditions prescribed in
these rules, rises by periodical increments from a minimum to a maximum. Itincludes the class of pay hitherto  known as progressive:-
17CHAP II ] [ RULE 12 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
              (a)    Time-scales are said to be identical if the minimum, the maximum, the
period of increment and the rate of increment of the time-scales are
identical.
                  (b)      A post is said to be on the same time-scale as another post on a time-scale
if the two time-scales are identical and the posts fall within a cadre or a
class in a cadre, such cadre or class having been created in order to fill allposts, involving duties of approximately the same character or degree of
responsibility, in a service or establishment or group of establishments, so
that the pay of the holder of any particular post is determined by hisposition in the cadre or class and not by the fact that he holds that post.
   Note .- Method of calculation of average pay of a post on a time-scale of pay-
(1)   In the case of gazetted appointments on time-scales of pay the
following formula may be applied for ascertaining the average
pay :-
           Average pay =  (A+B)/2 + (B-A)/2 [1-(R+1) {.014+1- .01R/F-E }]
             Where  A  = Minimum pay,
                 B = Maximum pay,
                 R = Period of rise,
                 E = Average age at entry in the Grade, and
              F =   Average age at retirement on superannuation pension.
This   may be taken to be 55 in almost every case unless
there are special reasons to take it either at a lower or ahigher figure.
(2)      In the case of non-gazetted post on time scales of pay, the following
formula is to be applied :-
                         Average pay = (A+B)/2+(B-A)/2[1-(R+1) {.021+ (1-.015R /F–E)}]
                       Where   A = Minimum pay,
18**[G O(P) No.359/1976/Fin., Dated 23/11/1976]*[G O(P) No. 52/65/Fin., Dated 03/02/1965]CHAP II ] DEFINITIONS [ RULE 12
                                      B = Maximum pay,
                                      R = Period of rise,
                                      E = Average age at entry in the Grade, and
                         F = Average age at retirement on superannuation pension.
This may be taken to be 55 in almost every case unless
there are special reasons to take it either at a lower or a
higher figure.
(3)    *In cases where one grade is the channel of promotion to another
grade, that is to say where everybody in the lower grade is
ultimately promoted to the higher grade, the following formulamay be adopted to find the average cost of   appointments in  the
lower  grade :-
                       Average pay  =A+C/2+(C-A)/2[1-(S+1) {0.006+(1-0.004S)/G - E }]                      Where A = Minimum pay,
                              C = Pay just before promotion to the higher grade,
                             S = Period of rise from A to C,                             E = Average age at entry in the lower grade, and
                                    G = Average age at the time of promotion to the higher grade.
(4)     **If the average pay worked out by any of the methods prescribed,
falls below the minimum of the time-scale plus one forth of the
difference between the minimum and maximum of the time scale,
the average of the minimum and the maximum of the time-scaleshall be taken as the average pay.
               Government Decision
               A scale of pay is reckoned as higher time-scale on the following principles :-
19*[G O(P) No. 36/1964/Fin., Dated 20/01/1964]CHAP II ] [ RULE 12 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
                  (i)   according to the higher maximum,
                 (ii)   if the maximum is the same, according to the higher minimum, and
                 (iii)   if the maximum and the minimum are the same according to the rate  of
increment.
     (36)   Transfer .- means the movement of an officer from one headquarter station
in which he is employed to another such station, either,
                 (a)   to take up the duties of a new post, or
                 (b)   in consequence of a change of his headquarters.
     (37)   Travelling Allowance .- means an allowance granted to an officer to cover the
expenses which he incurs in travelling in the interest of the public service. Itincludes allowances granted for the maintenance of conveyances.
              Government Decision
               *The expressions ‘road mileage’ and ‘mileage allowance’ wherever they occur,
shall be assigned meaning as referring to ‘distance in kilometres’.
20*[G O(P) No. 1109/1987/Fin., Dated 23/12/1987]CHAP III ] GENERAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE [ RULE 13
CHAPTER III
GENERAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE
13.       Except as provided by this rule, no person may be appointed to a post in
Government service without his producing a medical certificate of health inthe form annexed below. The Government may, in individual cases, dispensewith the production of a certificate, and may by general orders exempt anyspecified class of officers from the operation of this rule.
FORM
                 I do hereby certify that I have examined  A  B,  a candidate for employment in
the ……………………… Department, and cannot discover that he has anydisease, constitutional affection or bodily infirmity except…………… I donot consider this a disqualification for employment in the officeof………………………..
           A B’s age is according to his own statement  x years and by appearance y
years.
              A B has been re-vaccinated/vaccinated or has/had smallpox.
 Note 1 .-The certificate prescribed above must ordinarily be signed by a Civil
Medical Officer of rank not lower than a Civil Surgeon or HonoraryMedical Officer of   Civil Surgeon’s rank or the Director of  IndigenousMedicine, but in the case of a person whom it is proposed to appointto a post the maximum pay of which is not more than * ````` 1050 and who
cannot conveniently be brought before an officer of higher rank, acertificate from an Assistant Surgeon with M.B.B.S. degree may, at thediscretion of the appointing authority, be accepted.
        *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect
from 1
st April 1985.
21CHAP III ] [ RULE 13 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
Note 2 .- An officer, in whom a defect has been noticed by the Medical Officer
who granted him his first certificate of health, may not be transferredfrom the office to which he was originally appointed, to another office,
the duties of which are different in  character, except on production of
another certificate from a competent authority to the effect that thedefect will not materially interfere with the discharge of his new duties
by reason of such transfer.
 Note 3 .-The following classes of officers are exempted from producing a medical
certificate of health :-
(1)     an officer recruited through a competitive examination who had to
undergo medical examination in accordance with regulations
prescribed for appointment to service under Government;
(2)   an officer in service other than the last grade appointed in a
temporary vacancy of less than three months duration;
(3)     an officer  in the last grade appointed in a temporary vacancy of less
than six months duration ;
(4)      a temporary officer who has already been medically examined in one
office if transferred to another office without a break in service subject
to the provision of Note 2 above;
(5)    a retired officer re-employed immediately after retirement.
 Note 4 .-  (a)  The production of a medical certificate is necessary when-
    (i)   an officer is promoted from non-qualifying service paid from a
Local Fund to a post in Government service other than last grade;
       (ii)     a person is re-employed after resignation or forfeiture of past service;
   (b)   when  a  person  is  re-employed in circumstances other than
those referred to in clause (a) (ii) above the appointing authoritywill decide whether a medical certificate should be produced.
22CHAP III ] GENERAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE [ RULE 13
   Note 5 .-Once a person is asked to produce a medical certificate of fitness
for entry into Government service whether in a temporary or
permanent capacity and has actually been examined and declaredunfit, it is not open to the appointing authorities subordinate toGovernment to use their discretion to ignore the certificate that hasbeen produced.
              Government Decision
          The question of laying down appropriate rules to govern the Medical
Examination of candidates recruited to Government service wasconsidered by Government. After taking into account all the relevantaspects of the question, the following rules have been laid down in thisbehalf:
                   1.   Normally a candidate should be medically examined before his first
appointment. In certain cases, however, when a candidate is requiredto join immediately for work or for training, the appointment may bemade without first obtaining the medical certificate, though theappointment should be subject to the officer being declaredmedically fit. In all such cases, if an officer is declared unfit onmedical examination and he prefers an appeal he should be retainedin service till the case is finally decided.
                     2.    Similarly, in the case of a Government servant whose appointment is made
on a temporary basis on the strength of a medical certificate issued by alower authority or without such a certificate, it may be necessary to get acertificate of fitness from the appropriate medical authority. If the
appropriate medical authority finds that the person is not fit for retention
in service at all and if an appeal for a second medical examination fromthe Government servant concerned is accepted the person concernedshould be allowed to continue in service till the verdict of appropriatemedical authority is known. In case it is decided not to accede to the
23CHAP III ] [ RULE 13 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
request for further medical examination, the services of the officer
should be terminated forthwith.
                   3.    The intimation regarding unfitness of a candidate should immediately
on receipt be communicated to the person concerned with a note thatappeal, if any, must be made by the candidate/ Government servantconcerned within one month of the communication of the findings ofthe Medical Officer and that, if any, Medical certificate is produced aspiece of evidence about the possibility of an error of judgement in thedecision of the Medical Officer who examined him, in the first instance,the certificate must contain a note by the Medical Officer concerned tothe effect that it has been given in full knowledge of the fact that thecandidate has already been rejected as unfit for service by a MedicalOfficer.
               4.   In case no appeal (with requisite evidence in support of his case) is
preferred by the candidate/ Government servant within one month ofthe date of communication to him of the findings of the Medical Officer,his services should be terminated forthwith on the expiry of the periodof one month and ordinarily no appeal should be allowed after theexpiry of that period.
              5.   In case where a Government servant or a candidate for Government
service is declared unfit for retention in Government service orappointment in the Government service by a Medical Officer, the grounds
for rejection may be communicated to him in broad terms without givingminute details regarding the defects pointed out by the Medical Officer.Cases where the grounds of rejection have not been clearly stated by theMedical Officer, in his report, may be referred to the Government for advice.
                    6.    For the first Medical Examination of the candidate/Government servant
as well as the subsequent examinations found necessary by the
24*[G O(P) No. 343/1963/Fin., Dated 07/06/1963]
**[Insertion G O(P) No. 413/2009/ Fin., Dated 25/09/2009 (with effect from 24/04/2007)]CHAP III ] GENERAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE [ RULES 13-14
appointing authority on account of an appeal,  the appointing authority
shall give suitable requisition to the Medical Officer concerned.
                   7.    No appeal shall lie against the adverse findings of a Medical Officer to
whom the case is referred on appeal.
  Note 1 .- Certificate of physical fitness for entry into Government service
should always be from Medical Practitioners of Modern Medicine orfrom Doctors of Indigenous Medicine.
  Note 2 .- The Medical Authority who is to issue a medical certificate a second
time on appeal shall be of a higher status than the other who issued thefirst medical certificate.
  Note 3 .- *When a final certificate has been issued either by the Director of
Health Services, or by the Director of Indigenous Medicines, thatcertificate will be final and no appeal will be permitted [Vide G.O.(P)1034/61/Pub. (Ser.D), dated 2
nd December 1961 and G.O.(P) 570/62/Pub.
(Ser. D), dated 25th October 1962]
13A      **New recruits shall produce a form for Service and Payroll Administrative
Repository for Kerala (SPARK) in Form No. 15, duly filled up at the time ofjoining duty for registering their details.
14.         Unless in any case it be otherwise distinctly provided, the whole time of an
officer is at the disposal of the Government which pays him and he may beemployed in any manner required by proper authority, without claim foradditional remuneration, whether the services required of him are such aswould ordinarily be remunerated from the General Revenues of India or ofthe States or the Revenues of a Local Fund or from the funds of a Body,incorporated or not , which is wholly or substantially owned or controlled
by the Government.
25#[G O(P) No.593/1970/Fin., Dated 20/08/1970]
*[Insertion G O(P) No. 212/2005/Fin., Dated 11/05/2005]CHAP III ]  [ RULES 14-15 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
  Note 1 .- Every  officer must attend the office punctually. For every three
day’s late attendance without permission, an officer will forfeit a day’s
casual leave for which he is eligible. The computation of the forfeitureof a day’s casual leave will be with respect to the calendar year and lateattendance without permission for less than three days at the end of acalendar year will be ignored.
  Note 2 .- # No other kind of leave except casual leave shall be forfeited for late
attendance without permission. Disciplinary action under the KeralaCivil  Services (C.C and  A.) Rules, 1960 may be taken against theofficers concerned for late attendance without permission if there is nocasual leave to be forfeited.
*14 A.     The period  of unauthorized absence of an Officer on account of participation
in strike shall be treated as ‘Dies-Non’.  During the period of ‘Dies-Non’, heshall not  be eligible for pay and allowances and the period shall not becounted for admissibility of earned leave.  However, such period shall becounted for the purposes of increment and half pay leave, notwithstandinganything contained in any other rules in this part.
               *This  shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 10
th January,
2002.
15.  (a)   Two or more officers cannot be appointed substantively to the same permanent
post at the same time.
         (b)   An officer cannot be appointed substantively, except as a temporary measure,
to two or more permanent posts at the same time.
         (c)    An officer cannot be appointed substantively to a post on which another officer
holds a lien.
26CHAP III ] GENERAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE [ RULES 16-18
16.      Unless in any case it be otherwise provided in these rules, an officer on
substantive appointment to any permanent post acquires a lien on that postand ceases to hold any lien previously acquired on any other post.
17.         Unless his lien is suspended under Rule 18 or transferred under Rule 20 an
officer holding substantively  a permanent post retains a lien on that post-
               (a)    while performing the duties of that post;
              (b)   while on foreign service or holding a temporary post, or officiating in
another post;
                (c)    during joining time on transfer to another post, unless he is transferred
substantively to a post on lower pay, in which case his lien is transferredto the new post from the date on which he is relieved of his duties in theold post;
                (d)    while on leave;
               (e)    while under suspension; and
                 (f)   while under training.
18.  (a)  The Government shall suspend the lien of an officer on a permanent post
which he holds substantively if  he is appointed in a substantivecapacity—
                 (1)    to a permanent post outside the cadre on which he is borne, or
                 (2)    provisionally to a post on which another officer would hold a lien had
his lien not been suspended under this rule.
    (b)  The Government may, at their option, suspend the lien of an officer on a
permanent post which he holds substantively, if he is transferred to foreignservice or in circumstances not covered by clause (a) of this rule, istransferred, whether in a substantive or officiating capacity to a post inanother cadre, and in any of these cases there is reason to believe that he
27*[G O(P) No. 102/1966/Fin., Dated  25/03/1967]CHAP III ] [ RULE 18 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
will remain absent from the post on which he holds a lien for a period of not
less than three years.
               Ruling
               *The lien of an officer on a permanent post should not be suspended when
he is appointed to a higher post in a different cadre, in case the higher postfalls within the regular line of promotion from the lower post.
       (c)      if an officer’s lien on a post is suspended under clause (a) or  (b) of this rule, the
post may be filled substantively, and the officer appointed to hold it substantively,
shall acquire a lien on it; provided that the arrangements shall be reversed as
soon as the suspended lien revives.
   Note .-When a post is filled substantively under this clause, the appointment
will be termed a provisional appointment, the officer appointed will
hold a provisional lien on the post and that lien will be liable tosuspension under clause (a)  but not under (b) of this rule.
       (d)     an officer’s lien which has been suspended under clause (a) of this rule shall
revive as soon as he ceases to hold a lien on a post of the nature specified insub-clause (1) or (2) of that clause.
      (e)     an officer’s lien which has been suspended under clause (b)  of this rule shall
revive as soon as he ceases to be on foreign service or to hold a post in
another cadre, provided that a suspended lien shall not revive because the
officer takes leave, if there is reason to believe that he will on return fromleave, continue to be on foreign service or to hold a post in another cadre and
the total period of absence on duty will not fall short of three years or that he
will hold substantively a post of the nature specified in sub-clause  (1)  or (2)
of  clause (a).
28CHAP III ] GENERAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE [ RULES 18-21
   Note .-When it is known that an officer on transfer to  post outside his cadre
is due to retire on superannuation pension within three years of his
transfer, his lien on the permanent post cannot be suspended.
19.(a)    An officer’s lien on a post may in no circumstances be terminated, even with
his consent, if the result will be to leave him without a lien or a suspendedlien upon a permanent post.
     (b)     In a case covered by sub-clause (2) of clause (a) of Rule 18, the suspended lien
may not, except on the written request of the officer concerned, be terminatedwhile the officer remains in Government service; provided that it shall be open tothe competent authority to refuse consent for the confirmation or retention of anofficer in a permanent post outside the cadre on which he is borne unless hemakes a written request that his lien  on the permanent post in his parent officeshould be terminated.
20.         Subject to the provisions of Rule 21 the Government may transfer to another
permanent post in the same cadre the lien of an officer who is not performingthe duties of the post to which the lien relates, even if that lien has beensuspended.
21.(a)      The Government may transfer an officer from one post to another; provided that,
except-
                (1)    on account of inefficiency or misbehavior, or
                (2)    on his written request,
               an officer shall not be transferred substantively to, or except in a case covered
by Rule 58, appointed to officiate in  a post carrying less pay than the pay of thepermanent post on which he holds a lien, or would hold a lien had his lien notbeen suspended under Rule 18.
       (b)    Nothing contained in clause (a) of this rule or in clause (18) of Rule 12 shall
operate to prevent the transfer of an officer to the post on which he would
29* [G O(P) No. 83/1980/Fin., Dated 23/01/1980]CHAP III ] [ RULES 21-22A KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
hold a lien, had it not been suspended in accordance with the provisions of
clause (a)  of Rule 18.
   Note .- Permanent transfers from a higher to lower scale in anticipation of the
abolition of a post are not transfers within the meaning of the aboverule.
22.            An officer may be required to subscribe to a provident fund, a family pension
fund or similar fund in accordance with such rules as the Government may byorder prescribe.
   Note 1 .- An officer who has entered service before the 19th August, 1976,
may, however, opt to subscribe for a policy in the official Branch of theState Life Insurance instead of the Provident Fund.
   Note 2 .- *Officers who are subscribers to the Family Benefit Scheme, going
on deputation/foreign service shall continue to subscribe to the FamilyBenefit Scheme and they themselves shall arrange for effecting recoveryand remittance of the amount from their pay.
#22A.     Any person who  enters Government Service on or after 19
th August, 1976
and has not crossed the age of 50 years, shall within a period of †one month
from  the date of such entry in service, subscribe to a policy in the officialbranch of the State Life Insurance at such rate as may be determined byGovernment from time to time and shall continue to subscribe till he ceasesto be in Government Service.
             This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 5
th
April, 1999.
# [Substitution G O(P) No. 511/2004/Fin., Dated 02/11/2004]
†[Substitution G O(P) No.229/2012/Fin Dated 19/04/2012 (with effect from 16/12/2008)]
30**[Insertion G O(P) No. 496/2007/Fin  Dated 11/10/2007]*[G O(P) No. 83/1980/Fin., Dated 23/01/1980]
#[Substitution G O(P) No.78/2010/Fin., Dated 19/02/2010 (with effect from 24/04/2006)]
@ [Insertion G O(P) No. 56/2006/Fin., Dated 03/02/2006]CHAP III ] GENERAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE [ RULES 22A-22C
   Note .- *When an employee crosses one pay range to the next higher range,
he shall take additional policy within 2 years of his coming to the nexthigher pay range. But this condition shall not apply to an employeewho has attained the age of 45 years at the time of crossing over to thenext higher range.
22 B.     #Any person  who enters Government service on or after the 1
st day of
September, 1984 and has not crossed the age of 50 years, shall within aperiod of one year from the date of entry in service enrol as a member ofGroup Insurance Scheme and subscribe to the scheme at such rate as maybe determined by Government from time to time and shall continue tosubscribe till he ceases to be in Government Service.
    @Note .-  Officers who are subscribers to the Group Insurance Scheme going
on deputation/foreign service shall continue to subscribe to the schemeand they shall arrange for effecting recovery and remittance of the
amount from their pay.
   This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force on the 6th day of July,
2002.
**22 C.   An Officer, who wishes to get his prior service, whether provisional or regular ,
in any department/institution, counted for any service benefit on enteringGovernment service, shall apply for the same before the competent authority/Government within a period of five years of the date of his entry in Government
service. Under no circumstances, such orders shall be issued by the CompetentAuthority/Head of Department/Government within a period less than five yearsbefore the date of retirement on superannuation:
31*[G O(P) No. 434/1965/Fin., Dated 17/11/1965]CHAP III ] [ RULES 22C-23 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
                Provided that an Officer who is already in service, shall be entitled to prefer
such claim within two years from the date of effect of this rule, and in whichcase, the concerned Head of Department and appointing authority shall takea decision on the above claim within a period of three years from the date ofreceipt of the claim or  within a period of two years before the date of retirementon superannuation of the officer, which ever is later:
               Provided further that this rule shall not apply to such Officers who are
already in service and will superannuate on or before 31
st December, 2011.
                 **This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force on the 6th day of
November, 2006.
 23. (a)  Subject to any exceptions specifically made in these rules, an officer shall
begin to draw the pay and allowances attached to his tenure of a post witheffect from the date he assumes the duties of that post, and shall cease todraw them as soon as he ceases to discharge those duties. If the charge istransferred afternoon, the transfer does not affect pay and allowances untilthe next day.
   Exception.- *An officer deputed for a course of  instruction or training which
is ordered to be treated as duty, if promoted to a higher post in theregular line during such course of instruction or training, may draw thepay thereof, without joining it, the benefit of promotion being givenfrom the date his junior assumes charge of the higher post.
      (b)     If, however, the substantive appointment of an officer is changed while he is
officiating in an appointment, or if, while so officiating, an officer is appointedfor the first time, to some substantive office, then, provided that the tenure ofhis officiating appointment is not interrupted by his new substantiveappointment, he may draw the pay thereof without joining it from the date on
**[Insertion G O(P) No. 496/2007/Fin  Dated 11/10/2007]
32*[Insertion G O(P) No. 629/2010/Fin., Dated  25/11/2010 (with effect from 01/03/2007)]CHAP III ] GENERAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE [ RULE 23
which he is appointed thereto, or from any later date on which the substantive
office becomes vacant.
    *(c)     In the case of notional promotions back arrears of pay and allowances are not
admissible.
      (d)     Promotions which do not involve change of duties shall have effect from the
date of occurrence of vacancy,  or the date of acquiring eligibility forpromotions, whichever is later,  but monetary  benefit shall be admissible onlyfor a maximum period of one year prior to the date of order of promotion.
  Note .- The detailed procedure to be followed when an officer assumes or
relinquishes charge of an office is contained in  Appendix III.
               Government Decision No. 1
            Questions have been raised regarding the authority competent to accept a
resignation, the circumstances under which resignation should be accepted,the date when a resignation becomes effective, and the authority competentto permit a Government servant to withdraw a resignation which he hasalready tendered. The following instructions will be followed :
                  (a)     Authority competent to accept resignation.- The appointing authority
in respect of the service or post in question is the authority competentto accept the resignation of the Government servant.
                (b)    Circumstances under which resignation should be accepted.-  It is not
in the interest of Government to retain an unwilling officer in service.The general rule, therefore, is that resignation from service should beaccepted after settling the liabilities outstanding against the Governmentservant, except in the circumstances indicated below:-
(i)     Where the officer concerned is engaged on work of importance and
it would take time to make alternative arrangements for filling the
33CHAP III ] [ RULE 23 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
post, the resignation should not be accepted straight away, but
only, when alternative arrangements for filling the post have been
made.
(ii)    Where a Government servant who is under suspension submits a
resignation, the competent authority should examine with
reference to the merits of the disciplinary case pending against
the Government servant whether it would be in the public interestto accept the under suspension.   Exceptions to this rule would be
where the alleged offences do not involve moral turpitude or where
the quantum of evidence against the accused officer is not strongenough to justify the assumption that if the departmental
proceedings were continued, the officer would be removed or
dismissed from service or where the departmental proceedingsare likely to be so protracted that it would be cheaper to the Public
Exchequer to accept the resignation.
                    (c)     Date when a resignation becomes effective.— The competent authority
should decide the date with effect from which the resignation should
become effective. In cases covered by (b) (i)  above the date should be
that with effect from which alternative arrangements can  be made forfilling the post. Where an officer is on leave, the competent authority
should decide whether he will accept the resignation with immediate
effect or with effect from the date following the termination of the leave.There is also no objection to a Government servant on leave being
permitted to resign his post without rejoining duty after leave, provided
the appointing authority so decides with due regard to theadministrative convenience of the department. Where a period of notice
is prescribed which a Government servant should give when he wishes
to resign from service the competent authority may decide to count theperiod of leave towards the notice period. In other cases also it is open
to the competent authority to decide whether the resignation should
34†[G O(P) No. 98/1965/Fin., Dated  22/03/1965]
**[G O(P) No. 82/1966/Fin., Dated  03/03/1966]CHAP III ] GENERAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE [ RULES 23-24
become effective immediately or with effect from some prospective
date. In the latter case, the date should be specified.
         (d)   †Authority competent to permit withdrawal of resignation.-  A
resignation becomes effective when it is accepted and the officer isrelieved of his duties. Where a resignation has not become effectiveand the officer wishes to withdraw it, it is open to the authority whichaccepted the resignation either to permit the officer to withdraw theresignation or to refuse the request for such withdrawal. Where,however, a resignation has become effective, the officer is no longer inGovernment service and acceptance of the request for withdrawal ofresignation would amount to re-employing him in service aftercondoning the period of break.
          Concurrence of ‘Finance’, and the Public Service Commission, wherever
necessary, should be obtained before a request for withdrawal of resignationwhich has already become effective, is accepted.
               Government Decision No.2
            **Condonation of the period of break and revival of past service in such
cases will be for the purpose of pension only, if it is otherwise admissible.The Government servant’s earlier service will not count for fixation of pay,increment or leave. His pay will be fixed at the minimum of the scale of pay ofthe post to which he is re-employed after resignation and the period of breakwill be treated as a period spent out of employment.
24.        Unless the Government in view of the special circumstances of the
case, otherwise determine, after five years’ continuous absence fromduty, an officer shall be removed from service after following the
35**[G O(P) No. 1002/1997/Fin., Dated 06/11/1997]
†[G O(P) No.637/2002/Fin., Dated 19/10/2002]CHAP III ] [ RULES 24-24A KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
procedure laid down in the Kerala Civil Services (Classification,
Control and Appeal) Rules, 1960, * except in cases covered by Rule24A.
             * This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect
from 16
th December, 1983.
*24A.     Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, if an officer who availed
himself of leave without allowances to take up employment abroad or withinthe country **[or for joining spouse] for a total period of 
† twenty years,
whether continuously or in broken periods, does not return to dutyimmediately on the expiry of the leave, his service shall be terminated afterfollowing the procedure laid down in the Kerala Civil Services (Classification,Control and Appeal) Rules, 1960.
   Note .- This rule shall have effect from the 16
th day of December, 1983 and
shall apply to all cases of grant of leave without  allowances on or  afterthat date, for taking  up employment abroad or within the country, inextension of the leave already granted or otherwise, and such leavegranted before that date shall be reckoned for applying the 
†twenty
years limit.
              *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from
16th December 1983.
              †  This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force witheffect from
5th February, 1996.
*[G O(P) No. 953/1986/Fin., Dated 27/12/1986]
36*[G O(P) No. 434/1965/Fin., Dated 17/11/1965]CHAP IV ] PAY [ RULES 25-26
CHAPTER  IV
PAY
25.         Except in the case of personal pay granted in the circumstances defined in
Rule 12 (26)  (a), the pay of an officer shall not be so  increased as to exceedthe pay  sanctioned  for his  post without the sanction of Government.
26.          When an officer is treated as on duty under Rule 12 (7) (iii), the Government
may,  at their option, authorise payment to him of the pay of his substantiveappointment or of any lower rate of pay which they may consider suitable,provided that the pay admissible may, if the Government so direct, be insteadof either of the rates just specified, the pay of any officiating appointmentwhich the officer would have drawn but for undergoing such training, subjecthowever to the condition that this rate of pay shall not be allowed for aperiod longer than that for which the officer would have held the officiating
appointment had he not been placed on such course of training.
   Note 1 .- A reservist of the Defence Services in the employment of the State
Government, when called up for periodical training, receives the payand allowances to which he is entitled under the Defence Services. Hewill also receive the excess, if any, of his pay under the Governmentover the pay under Defence Department. The periods spent in trainingand on the journey to and from the place of training will be treated asduty for purposes of leave, increments and pension.
   Note 2 .- *The expressions “the pay of his substantive appointment” and
“the pay of any officiating appointment” occurring in the above ruleshould be taken to mean “the pay which the officer would have drawnin the post which he holds substantively” and “the pay which theofficer would have drawn in the officiating appointment but forundergoing the training’’. In neither case, is there any restriction to
37CHAP IV ] [ RULES 26-28 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
draw the following kinds of emoluments which the officer would have
drawn in the substantive or officiating appointment but  for the training
                (i)    Basic pay
               (ii)    Special pay granted in lieu of a higher time-scale of pay
              (iii)    Personal  pay
            (iv)   Any other emoluments specially classed as pay and which are
specifically allowed to be drawn during training
               (v)    Dearness pay
              (vi)    Dearness allowance
             (vii)    House rent allowance
               Ruling
An officer holding a provisional appointment deputed for training where
the period of training is treated as duty will be allowed to draw for the periodof training the  pay and allowances attached to the provisional appointment,
if it is certified by the competent authority that the officer would have held
the provisional appointment but for his deputation for training.
27.          Rules 28  to  37 apply to time-scale of pay generally. They do not, however
apply to any time-scale sanctioned by the Government in so far as they are
inconsistent with terms specially so sanctioned for such time-scale.
28.          The initial substantive pay of an officer who is appointed substantively to a
post on a time-scale of pay is regulated as follows :
               If he holds a lien on a permanent post or would hold a lien on such a post
had his lien not been suspended, he will draw as initial pay the stage of the
time-scale next above his substantive pay in respect of the old post :
               Provided that except in cases of re-employment after resignation or removal or
dismissal from public service, if he either has previously held substantively or
38CHAP IV ] PAY [ RULE 28
officiated in (i)  the same post, or (ii) a permanent or temporary post on the same
time-scale, or (iii) a permanent post on an identical time-scale or a temporary post(including a post in a body, incorporated or not, which is wholly or substantiallyowned or controlled by the Government) on an identical time-scale then theinitial pay shall not, except in cases of reversion to the parent cadre governed byitem (iii) above be less than the pay which he drew on the last such occasion andhe shall count the period during which he drew that pay on such last and anyprevious occasions for increment in the stage of the time-scale equivalent tothat pay. The service rendered in a post referred to in item (iii) shall, on reversionto the parent cadre, count towards initial fixation of pay, to the extent and subjectto the conditions indicated below:-
                 (a)    The officer should have been approved for appointment to the particular
grade/post in which the previous service is to be counted;
                  (b)      All his seniors, except those regarded as unfit for such appointment, were
serving in posts carrying the scale of pay in which the benefit is to beallowed or in higher posts, whether in the department itself or elsewhere,and at least one junior was holding a post in the department carrying thescale of pay in which the benefit is to be allowed; and
               (c)    the service will count from the date his junior is promoted and the
benefit will be limited to the period the officer would have held thepost in his parent cadre had he not been appointed to the ex-cadrepost.
  Note 1 .- The provisions in the above rule apply in cases of substantive
appointments to higher time-scales of pay only. In other cases theofficer’s pay in the new appointment shall be fixed at his pay in theprevious appointment, if it is a stage in the new scale or at next lowerstage, if it is not a stage in the  new scale, the difference being treatedas personal pay, such personal pay, being absorbed in future increasesof pay. This will not, however, apply to cases of reversions.
39*[Substitution G O(P) N0. 630/2010/Fin., Dated 25/11/2010 (with effect from 26/03/ 2006)]CHAP IV ] [ RULES 28-28A KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
  Note 2 .- The provisions in item ( iii) of the proviso to the above rule in
respect of protection of pay and period of increment shall be applicableto Government servants on their appointment directly or on transferfrom a post carrying identical time-scale of pay without fulfilment ofthe conditions indicated thereunder subject to the condition that thisbenefit will not be admissible to an individual who enters Governmentservice for the first time from a post in a body incorporated or notwhich is wholly or substantially owned or controlled by Government.
28A.      Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, where an officer holding
a post in a substantive, temporary or officiating capacity is promoted orappointed in a substantive, temporary or officiating capacity to another postcarrying a higher time-scale of pay, his initial pay in the higher time-scale ofpay, shall be fixed at the stage next above the pay notionally arrived at in thelower time-scale of pay by increasing the actual pay drawn by him in thelower time-scale by one increment. *He shall be given opportunity to opt anydate for fixation of pay in the  higher time scale of pay from the followingoptions, namely:-
              Option  (a)—Pay will be fixed in the higher time scale of pay, on the date of
promotion, under this rule.  Next increment in the higher time scale will fall dueonly on completion of one year from the date of such fixation of pay.
                                                          OR
               Option  (b)—Pay on the date of promotion will be initially fixed at the stage
of higher time scale of pay of the promoted post next above the pay in thelower time scale of pay.  Thereafter fixation of pay under the rule will beallowed based on the pay in the lower post on the date opted by the promotee,i.e., on the date of increment in the lower post.  Next increment will fall dueonly on completion of one year from the date of fixation of pay under this rule.
40* [Substitution G O(P) No. 630/2010/Fin., Dated. 25/11/2010]
# [Substitution G O(P) No. 465/2012/Fin., Dated. 17/08/2012 (with  effect  from 17/08/2012) ]CHAP IV ] PAY [ RULE 28A
† [G O(P) No. 624/1984/Fin., Dated 29/10/1984]If the fixation of pay under this rule on the date of option does not make any
change in the pay in  the higher time scale, the pay will remain at the samestage till completion of one year from the date of initial fixation (date ofpromotion) of pay in the higher time scale.  Next increment in such cases willbe allowed on the completion of one year from the date of initial fixation ofpay in the higher time scale of pay.
                The competent authority shall incorporate in the promotion order a provision
to the effect that the officer shall exercise option within one month from thedate of order of promotion or of taking  charge in the promoted post whicheveris later.  The option under this rule shall be in # Form No. 18.
              Provided that the provisions of this rule shall not apply to promotions *to
posts carrying a scale of pay, the minimum pay of which exceeds ````` 20700.
            
This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from
26th  March 2006.
               † The limit of ````` 550 has been revised to ````` 650 with effect from 1st January
1966 [G.O. (P) 261/67/Fin., dated 4th July 1967, G.O.(P) 91/68/Fin., dated 5th
March 1968] and ````` 650 to ````` 900 with effect from 1st July 1968 [G.O. (P) 173/
70/Fin., dated 20th March 1970] and from ````` 900 to ````` 1200 with effect from
1st July 1973 [G.O. (P) 136/75/Fin., dated 1st April 1975 and from ````` 1,200 to
````` 1,550 with effect from 1st July 1978[G.O.(P) 493/79/Fin., dated 28th May
1979] and from ````` 1550 to ````` 2100 with effect from 1st July, 1983 [G.O.(P)
1109/87/Fin. dated 23rd December 1987] and from ````` 2100 to ````` 2640 with
effect from 1st July 1988 [G.O.(P) 1005/92/Fin. dated 27th November, 1992
**and from ````` 12,600 to `````  20700 with effect from 26th March, 2006 [G.O.(P)
145/2006/Fin., dated 25th March, 2006]
41** [G O(P) No. 348/1975/Fin., Dated 01/08/1975]
# [G O(P) No.710/1970/Fin., Dated  05/10/1970]CHAP IV ] [ RULE 28A KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
               **Provided also that where a Government servant is immediately before his
promotion or appointment to a higher post,  drawing pay at the maximum ofthe time-scale of the lower post, his initial pay in the time-scale of the higherpost shall be fixed at the stage next above the pay notionally arrived at byincreasing his pay in respect of the lower post by an amount equal to the lastincrement in the time-scale of the lower post.
               Effective from the date of order.                 # Provided that if he has either previously held substantively or officiated in
(i) the same post or (ii) a permanent or temporary post on the same time-scale
or (iii) a permanent post on an identical time-scale or a temporary post on an
identical time-scale, such post being on the same time-scale as a permanentpost, then the initial pay shall not be less than the pay which he drew, on thelast such occasion and he shall count for  increment the period during whichhe drew that pay on such last or any previous occasions.
              This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with  effect from
21
st July 1964.
               Ruling  No.1
                In cases where the application of the rule would give rise to anomalies in as
much as an officer officiating  in a higher post could get his pay refixed at astage higher than the pay drawn by another who stands confirmed in thehigher post on the same scale of pay, the anomaly will be removed by refixingthe pay of the senior officer at the stage equal to that fixed for the juniorofficer in the higher post, the orders of refixation being issued by thecompetent authority under Rule 34, Part I, Kerala Service Rules. The refixationof pay in such cases will be made subject to the following conditions:
42*[G O(P) No. 24/1965/Fin., Dated 13/01/1965]CHAP IV ] PAY [ RULE 28A
             (a)  Both the junior and senior officers should belong to the same
cadre and the post in which they have been promoted orconfirmed, as the case may be, should be identical and in thesame cadre.
                 (b)   The scale of pay of the lower post in which they would have drawn
their pay but for their promotion or confirmation should be identical.
               (c)   The anomaly should be directly as a result of the application of Rule
28A. For example, if the junior officer draws from time to time a higherrate of pay than the senior by virtue of fixation of pay under the normalrules or any advance increment granted to him, the provision containedin this ruling should not be involved to step up the pay of the seniorofficer.
               (d)   The refixation of pay of the senior officer should be done with effect
from the date of refixation of pay of the junior officer. The next incrementof the senior officer will however be drawn on the date on which itwould have fallen due but for this refixation of pay.
              
 Ruling No.2
              *In the case of a Government servant, officiating in a post and whose pay had
been refixed under this rule, if he is confirmed in that post with effect from aretrospective date, the refixation of pay done after the date of confirmation willhave to be revised. The over payments consequent on such revision will first beset off against the arrears, if any, that might become payable to the Governmentservant for a portion of the period from the date of confirmation to the date ofissue of orders of confirmation. The balance of overpayments that cannot be setoff against the arrears, if any, shall be waived.
                    This Ruling will be deemed to have come into force with effect from 3
rd February
1962.
43* [G O(P) No.650/1972/Fin., Dated 12/12/1972]
**[G O(P) No. 150/1977/Fin., Dated 17/05/1977]
 # [G O(P) No. 79/1975/Fin., Dated 03/03/1975]CHAP IV ] [ RULE 28A KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
               Ruling No. 3
                *The refixation of pay in the higher officiating post on the date of change of
pay in the lower time-scale contemplated in this rule cannot be allowed duringthe period of bar on increment with or without cumulative effect. But, in thecases of bar on increment without cumulative effect there is no objection togive the refixation on a notional basis and to give the monetary benefit afterthe expiry of the period of bar. Increments accruing in the lower substantive/officiating post from time to time cannot also be allowed during the period ofbar.
               Ruling No. 4
         **Increments barred with or without cumulative effect in the lower
substantive officiating post shall not be reckoned for fixation/refixationof pay in the higher time-scale. But in the case of bar on increment withoutcumulative effect, there is no objection to grant the barred incrementsnotionally for fixation/refixation of pay and to give the monetary benefitafter the expiry of the period of bar.
               Ruling No. 5
          # A revision of pay as contemplated in Ruling No.2 shall not be
necessary in the case of retrospective confirmation ordered after thedate of retirement of an officer.
               This ruling will be deemed to have taken effect from 3
rd February 1962.
               Government Decision No. 1
           1.   The provisions of this rule will not apply to cases of revision of scales of pay
referred to in Rule 30 ibid.
44† [G O(P) No. 06/1965/Fin., Dated  04/01/1965]
**[G O(P) No. 580/1970/Fin., Dated 13/08/1970]* [G O(P) No. 475/1990/Fin., Dated  25/09/1990]CHAP IV ] PAY [ RULE 28A
       2.  * An officer officiating in a post, when appointed to a higher post on the
advice of the Public Service Commission or otherwise is eligible for his initial
pay being fixed under this rule and  is also entitled to the benefit of a refixation
contemplated in the last sentence of the rule.
                 Effective from 31st October, 1986.
          3.   When a person who holds a post in a regular capacity is appointed to a post
on a higher time-scale in the same service under Rule 31 or in a different
service under Rule 9 of Kerala State  and Subordinate Services Rules, fixationof pay under this rule is permissible with reference to the pay drawn in the
regular appointment
       4.   When a fresher is appointed provisionally to a post otherwise than on the
advice of the Public Service Commission, under Rule 9 of Kerala State andSubordinate Service Rules and again appointed to a still higher post under
the same rule, a fixation of pay in the higher post with reference to the pay
drawn in the lower post is not admissible.
          5.    A person holding a post in a regular capacity is appointed provisionally to a
post in the same service under Rule 31 of the Kerala State and Subordinate
Service Rules. He is again appointed to a still higher post in the same serviceunder Rule 31 or to a post in another service under Rule 9 of Kerala State and
Subordinate Services Rules. Fixation of pay with reference to the provisional
pay drawn in the post to which he was appointed provisionally at first is notadmissible in the other posts.
               
†[The decisions 1,3,4 and 5 above will be deemed to have taken effect from
3rd February 1962, the date on which the rule came into force]
      6.   **The pay drawn by an officer in an ex-cadre post can be counted for
purpose of initial fixation of pay on promotion in the parent department.
45† [G O(P) No.458/1975/Fin., Dated 26/09/1975]# [G O(P) No.223/1977/Fin., Dated 14/07/1970]CHAP IV ] [ RULE 28A KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
But the benefit of refixation of pay contemplated in the rule is not
admissible to him as he loses connection with the ex-cadre post on
appointment to the parent department.
       7.       # The benefit of pay drawn in an ex-cadre post for purpose of initial fixation will not be
admissible, if an officer is reverted to the parent department, to a post carrying a scaleof pay lower than that of the ex-cadre post.
               Government Decision No. 2
                The benefit of refixation of pay contemplated in the last sentence in the first
para of the rule is admissible even in cases where the change of pay is due to
fixation of pay on account of revision of scale of pay. If both the lower and
the higher time-scales are revised, the benefit will be restricted to the casesof options exercised in respect of both the posts simultaneously.
               Government Decision No. 3
            
† Notional increment at the biennial increment shall be reckoned in the lower
scale for fixation of pay in the higher scale under Rule 28A.
               This decision shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st July 1973.
               Government Decision No. 4
           *The benefit of reckoning notional increment beyond the maximum of the
scale of pay of the lower post will also be admissible in cases where anemployee reaches the maximum of the post in the lower time-scale of paybefore he gets an increment in the scale of pay of the higher post  and insuch cases, he will be eligible for a refixation consequent on the change ofpay in the lower time-scale.
*[G O(P) No.274/1978/Fin., Dated 14/03 /1978]
46**[G O(P) No.475/1990/Fin., Dated  25/09/1990]CHAP IV ] PAY [ RULES 28A-30
             This decision shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st
August 1975.
              Government Decision No. 5
               [Deleted]
              **The amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with  effect from
25th June, 1986.
29.          The initial substantive pay of an officer who is appointed substantively to a
post on a time-scale of pay which has been reduced for reasons other thana diminution in the duties or responsibilities attached to posts thereon andwho is not entitled to draw pay on the time-scale as it stood prior to reduction,is regulated by Rule 28.
30.           The holder of a post, the pay of which is changed, shall be treated as if he were
transferred to a new post on the new pay; provided that he may at his optionretain his old pay until the date on which he has earned his next or anysubsequent increment in the old scale, or until he vacates his post or ceasesto draw pay in that time-scale. The option once exercised is final.
   Note 1 .-This rule applies to an officiating holder of a post as well. But any
break in the officiating period such as that due to transfer to anotherpost, or non-employment would operate as vacating of the post andthe pay during a subsequent officiating period in the same post will befixed only as if the officer was then appointed to the new scale of pay.‘The holder of a post’ occurring  in this rule applies also to a personwho is not actually holding the post, the pay of which is changed,provided he has a lien or a suspended lien on that post.
               The words ‘his old pay’ in the proviso of the rule should be held to include
not only the rate at which the individual was drawing his officiating pay on
47CHAP IV ] [ RULE 30 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
the crucial date but also the time-scale of pay in which he was drawing that
pay. Thus for the period of option the old scale of pay in which he wasdrawing his officiating pay should be treated as continuing for the individualconcerned.
   Note 2 .- Option under the proviso of the rule to officers under suspension is
governed by the following :-
                   1.    Cases in which the revised scale of pay takes effect from a date prior to
the date of suspension.
    In such cases the officer should be allowed to exercise the option
under Rule 30 even if the period, during which he is to exercisethe option, falls within the period of suspension. He will be entitledto the benefit of increase in pay if any,  in respect of the dutyperiod before suspension, and also in the subsistence allowance,for the period of suspension, as a result of such option.
                  2.   Cases in which the revised scale of pay takes effect from a date falling
within the period of  suspension -
(a)    Under suspension an officer retains a lien on his substantive post.
As the expression ‘holder of a post’ occurring in Rule 30 includesalso a person who holds a lien or a suspended lien on the posteven though he may not be actually holding the post, such anofficer should be allowed option under Rule 30 even while undersuspension. The benefit of option will however, practically accrueto him in respect of the period of suspension, only after hisreinstatement, depending on the fact whether the period ofsuspension is treated as duty or not.
(b)    An officer, who does not retain a lien on a post the pay of which
is changed, is not entitled to exercise the option under Rule 30. If,however, he is reinstated in the post and the period of suspension
48*[G O(P) No. 297/1966/Fin., Dated  05/07/1966]
**[G O(P) No. 364/1967/Fin., Dated 14/08/1967]CHAP IV ] PAY [ RULE 30
is treated as duty, he may be allowed to exercise the option after
such  reinstatement. In such cases, if there is a time-limit prescribedfor exercising the option and such period had already expiredduring the period of suspension, a relaxation may be made ineach individual case for extending the period during which theoption may be exercised.
              Government Decision
              The following principles will be followed for fixation of pay when the scale
of pay of a post held on a provisional basis is revised :-
                (i)     If the pay drawn in the previous scale is less than the minimum of the
revised scale then the pay in the revised scale may be fixed at theminimum.
             
    (ii)     If the pay drawn in the previous scale is a stage in the revised scale the
pay in the revised scale may be fixed at that stage.
                (iii)      If the pay drawn in the previous scale is not a stage, then the pay in the
revised scale may be fixed at the next lower stage, the difference beingtreated as personal pay to be absorbed in future increase in pay.
       2.    The above principles will also be adopted for regulating the pay of an
officer holding a post on a provisional basis when appointed to a higheror a lower post provisionally, except in cases of reversion.
        3.    *Past cases settled otherwise, will not be re-opened.
               Ruling No.1
                 **If an officer earns increment earlier than or after the original date on which
he was supposed to get it at the time of exercise of option under the aboverule due to revision of the date of increment, his pay should automatically be
49† [G O(P) No. 522/1981/Fin., Dated 21/08/1981]CHAP IV ] [ RULES 30-31 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
re-fixed with effect from the revised date of increment with reference to the
original option exercised by him under this rule and there will be no need forexercising a fresh option and issue of special orders for this.
               Ruling No.2
               The pay of an officer when the post  held by him is upgraded will be regulated
as follows :
                 (i)     If the competent authority specifically orders that the appointment of
an officer to the upgraded post involves an enhancement of duties andhigher responsibilities and is therefore a promotion, pay will be fixedunder Rule 28, 28A or 37 (a) of Part I, Kerala Service Rules, as the casemay be.
       
      †(ii)     In other cases, pay will be fixed under Rule 37 (a), Part I Kerala Service
Rules.
31.       An increment shall ordinarily be drawn as a matter of course unless it is
withheld. An increment may be withheld from an officer by the Governmentor by any authority to whom the Government may delegate this power underRule 9 if his conduct has not been good or his work has not been satisfactory.In ordering the withholding of the increment, the withholding authority shallstate the period for which it is withheld and whether the postponement shallhave the effect of postponing future increments.
  Note 1 .- An officer shall not be eligible for an increment unless he has acquired
the obligatory departmental test qualifications, if any, prescribed byGovernment from time to time to earn the increment.
   Note 2 .- A competent authority may order the deferring of the increment of
an officer, pending investigation into his conduct or performance of
work, in disciplinary cases. Such deferring of increment will not be
50†[G O(P) No.329/1984/Fin., Dated  05/07/1984]*[Substitution G O(P) No. 78/2010/Fin., Dated 19/02/2010 (with effect from 24/04/2006)]
**[G O(P) No.154/1974/Fin., Dated  08/07/1974]
# [G O(P) No. 133/1975/Fin., Dated 31/03/1975]CHAP IV ] PAY [ RULE 31
construed as ‘withholding of increments’ under the Kerala Civil Services
(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1960.
  Note 3 .- *An Officer shall  not be eligible to draw his first increment until he
subscribes to State Life Insurance Scheme and Group Insurance Schemeas specified in Rule 22A and 22B respectively.
              Government Decision No. 1
                An increment shall be granted from the first day of the month in which it
falls due.
                **This decision shall be deemed to have come into force with  effect from 1
st
April 1974.
               Government Decision No. 2
                 #Increment accruing consequent on declaration of probation shall be drawn
only with effect from the date of completion of probation but subsequentincrement shall be drawn on the first day of the month in which they fall due.
             This decision shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1
st
April 1974.
               Ruling
               † In cases where penalties of withholding of increments are imposed on an
officer, one after another, in separate disciplinary cases, the effect of the firstorder withholding increment will continue for the period specified in thatorder.  There after, the pay will be fixed by granting the increments whichwould have been admissible, but for the imposition of penalty and only then
51CHAP IV ] [ RULES 31-33 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
will the second order withholding increment be implemented, which will
continue to be in force for the period specified therein, and so on.
32.        Where an efficiency bar is prescribed in a time-scale, the increment next
above the bar shall not be given to an officer without the specific sanctionof the authority empowered to withhold increments.
   Note 1 .- On each occasion on which an officer is allowed to pass an efficiency
bar which had previously been enforced against him, he should comeover to the time-scale at such stage as the authority competent to declare
the bar removed, may fix for him, subject to the pay admissible according
to his length of service.
  Note 2 .- The cases of all officers held up at an efficiency bar should be
reviewed annually with a view to determine whether the quality of their
work has improved and generally, whether the defects for which theywere stopped at the bar have been remedied, to an extent sufficient to
warrant the removal of the bar.
33.         The following provisions prescribe the conditions on which service counts
for increments in a time-scale :-
                (a)   All duty in a post on a time-scale counts for increments in that time-scale.
             Ruling
                *Periods of service in a post on a time-scale at the same stage of pay only will
count for increment in that time-scale.
               The above ruling will be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1
st
November 1959.
               (b)    (1)     **Service in another post other than a post carrying less pay
referred to in clause (a) of Rule 21, whether in a substantive or
*[G O(P) No.235/1980/Fin., Dated 07/04/1980]
**[G O(P) No. 544/1962/Fin., Dated 08/11/1962  &
      G O(P) No. 81/1964/Fin., Dated 21/02/1964]
52***[G O(P) No. 217/2005/Fin., Dated 11/05/2005]†[G O(P) No. 204/1976/Fin., Dated 15/07/1976]CHAP IV ] PAY [ RULE 33
officiating capacity, service on deputation and leave except leave
without allowances taken otherwise than on medical certificate shallcount for increments in the time-scale applicable to the post on whichthe officer holds a lien as well as in the time-scale applicable to the postor posts, if any, on which he would hold a lien had his lien not beensuspended.
               (2)    All leave except leave without allowances taken otherwise than on
medical certificate and service on deputation count for incrementsin the time-scale applicable to a post in which an officer wasofficiating at the time he proceeded on leave or deputation andwould have continued to officiate but for his proceeding on leaveor deputation:
            
   †Provided that the leave without allowances under Rule 91 A shall count for
increments subject to the following conditions :-
              1.   The period qualifying for increments shall be restricted to the normal
period required for completion of the course, and
                   2.     Increments shall be granted only on production of the diploma or degree
or completion of the course.
                Provided further that the Government shall have power in any case in which
they are satisfied that the leave without allowances was taken for any causebeyond the officer’s control, to direct  that  leave  without  allowances  shallbe counted for increments under sub-clause (1) or (2).
                ***Proviso Omitted
               It shall be deemed to have come into force at once.
53*[G O(P) No. 145/1986/Fin., Dated 11/02/1986]CHAP IV ] [ RULE 33 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
              *Provided also that leave without allowances taken without  production of
medical certificate in continuation of maternity leave in accordance with theproviso to Rule 102 will count for increment.
             *This proviso shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 5
th
June, 1978.
  Note .- In cases coming under sub-clause (2) the appointing authority
should certify that the officer would have actually continued toofficiate in the post but for his proceeding on leave and the periodof leave will count for increments only to the extent it is covered bythe certificate. Where  no officiating arrangement is made in a leavevacancy and where the incumbent is likely to return to the samepost after the expiry of the leave the authority sanctioning the leavemay issue such a certificate at the time of grant of leave. In all caseswhere the certificates are issued the fact should be recorded in the
Service Book as and when such certificates are issued along with
the leave particulars.
        (c)    If an officer, while officiating in a post or holding a temporary post on a time-
scale of pay, is appointed to officiate in a higher post or to hold a highertemporary post, his officiating or temporary service in the higher post shall, ifhe is re-appointed to the lower post or is appointed or re-appointed to a poston the same time-scale of pay, count for increments in the time-scale applicableto such lower post.
           If an officer on reversion from an ex-cadre post to the parent cadre is
appointed to a post on a scale lower than that of the ex-cadre post butnot on the same time-scale as the post held at the time of his transfer tothe ex-cadre post, the service rendered on the higher scale in the ex-cadre post shall count for increments in the time-scale applicable to the
54*[G O(P) No. 97/1970/Fin., Dated  03/02/1970 & GO(P) No. 56/1972/Fin., Dated  01/03/1972]CHAP IV ] PAY [ RULE 33
cadre post subject to the  same conditions as are laid down for cases
falling under item (ii) of proviso to Rule 28.
   Exception .-  In cases where the appointment is to officiate in a higher post
or to hold a higher temporary post, in the regular line, the officiatingand temporary service in the higher post shall count for increments intime-scale applicable to the lower post, even if the officer is not re-appointed to the lower post or is not appointed or re-appointed to apost on the same time-scale of pay.
               The period of officiating/temporary service in the higher post which counts
for increment in the lower is, however, restricted to the period during whichthe officer would have officiated in the lower post but for his appointment tothe higher post. This clause applies also to an officer who is not actuallyofficiating in the lower post, but who would have so officiated in such lowerpost or in  a post on the same time-scale of pay had he not been appointed
to the higher post.
   Note .- *For the purpose of this rule, the officiating and temporary service in
the higher posts will include the period of leave which counts forincrements under clause (b).
      (d)    If an officer’s substantive tenure of a temporary post is interrupted by duty
in another post other than a post carrying less pay referred to in clause (a) ofRule 21 or by leave other than leave without  allowances or by foreignservice, such duty or leave or foreign service counts for increments in thetime-scale applicable to the temporary post if the officer returns to thetemporary post:
              Provided that the Government may in any case in which they are satisfied
that the leave was taken on account of illness or for any other cause beyond
55CHAP IV ] [ RULE 33 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
the officer’s control, direct that leave without allowances shall be counted
for increments under this clause.
      (e)    Foreign service counts for increments in the time-scale applicable to—
                 (i)     the post in Government service on which the officer concerned holds a
lien as well as the post or posts, if any, on which he would hold a lienhad his lien not been suspended, and
                 (ii)      any post in which he would have officiated or to which he may receive
officiating promotion under Rule 143 below for the duration of suchpromotion.
                (iii)      any post in the parent cadre on a lower scale of pay to which the officer
is appointed on reversion from the ex-cadre post subject to the fulfilmentof the conditions mentioned in item (iii) of proviso to Rule 28.
   Note 1 .- *Joining time counts for increments :-
                (i)    If it is under clause (a) of Rule 125, in the time-scale applicable to the
post on which the officer holds a lien or would hold a lien had his liennot been suspended as well as in the time-scale applicable to the post,the pay of which is received by the officer during the period, and
               (ii)    If it is under clause (b) of Rule 125, in the time-scale applicable to the
post/posts on which the last day of leave before commencement of thejoining time counts for increments.
  Explanation.-  For the purposes of this rule, the period treated as duty under
sub-clause (ii) of clause (7) of Rule 12 shall be deemed to be duty in apost if the officer draws pay of that post during such period.
   Note 2 .- In the case of an officer who, while officiating in a post proceeds on
training or to attend a course of instruction and who is treated as on
*[G O(P) No. 544/1962/Fin., Dated  08/11/1962]
56*[G O(P) No. 540/1994/Fin., Dated  30/09/1994]**[Circular No. 32532/RAI/61/Fin., Dated 12/01/1962]CHAP IV ] PAY [ RULE 33-34
duty, while under training, the period of such duty will count for
increment in the post in which he was officiating prior to his being sentfor training or instruction if he is allowed the pay of the officiating postduring such period.
             
 Government Decision No. 1
              ** A Government servant thrown out of service for want of vacancy and
again reappointed after a break in the same post or in another post carryingthe same time-scale of pay can count his prior service for  purposes ofincrement under Rule 33 (a) read with Rule 12 (35) (b).
               Government Decision No. 2
               *[Deleted]
             This deletion shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st
October, 1994.
34.            The Government may grant a premature increment to an officer on a time-
scale of pay.
    Note.- In the case of increments granted in advance, it is usually the intention
that the officer should be entitled to increments in the same manner asif he had reached his position in the scale  in the ordinary course and inthe absence of special orders to the contrary he should be placed onexactly the same footing, as regards future increments as an officer whohas so risen.
               Government Decision No. 1
In Rule 34 of Kerala Service Rules, Part I, it is laid down that Government
may grant a premature increment to an officer on a time-scale of pay without
57CHAP IV ] [ RULE 34 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
prejudice to his normal increment. At present there is no ruling or Government
decision as to the circumstances under which the rule regarding the grant ofadvance increments could be invoked in individual cases.
        2.   Good service entries and incentive awards are possible variants to advance
increments for the recognition of meritorious service rendered by Governmentservants. In G.O.(Ms.) 849/59/PD, dated 24
th September 1959, it has been
provided that incentive awards could be made for outstanding performanceof officers in the discharge of their duties and responsibilities. Under thissystem, cases of extraordinary originality, imagination or brilliance, or raredevotion to duty deserving recognition in a special way and suggestions forreduction of expenditure without affecting efficiency can all be considered
for incentive awards. Government, therefore, consider that the system ofawarding good service entries and incentive awards are eminently suitedfor recognising specific or individual cases of meritorious service/workon the part of Government servants; the grant of advance incrementbeing restricted to cases of sustained merit and continuous record ofgood work. In other words, good service entries, incentive awards andadvance increments will be in an ascending order in the matter ofrecognition of meritorious services of Government servants.
       3.   *Government also wish to emphasise that there should be more or less
uniform standards in recognising merit for the award of advanceincrements. The confidential report of the officer to whom advanceincrement is proposed to be given should, therefore, be looked into. Allproposals for the grant of advance increments in recognition of themeritorious work of Government servants shall be scrutinised by theconcerned Administrative Department, the Public Department and FinanceDepartment before placing the cases for sanction before the Council ofMinisters.
*[G O(P) No. 283/1975/Fin., Dated 01/07/1975]
58*[G O(P) No. 33/1976/Fin., Dated 23/01/1976]
†[G O(P) No. 17/1987/Fin., Dated 06/01/1987]
![G O(P) No. 146/1977/Fin., Dated 16/05/1977]# [G O(P) No. 283/1975/Fin., Dated 01/07/1975]**[Circular No. 8/1964/Fin., Dated 23/01/1964]CHAP IV ] PAY [ RULES 34-35
              This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 22nd
February 1974.
         4.    **The above procedure will not apply to the grant of advance increments on
notional basis for purposes of fixation of pay due to considerations otherthan of meritorious services of Government servants.
               Government Decision No. 2
                 # Incentive awards in the nature of cash awards for meritorious services
shall not be given to Gazetted Officers.
                The above amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect
from 22
nd February 1974.
                Government Decision No . 3
*Advance increments for meritorious service may be granted to both
Gazetted and non-Gazetted Officers.
                Government Decision No. 4
               † Good service entries, incentive awards and advance increments shall not
be granted to officers deputed for training courses.
35.         The authority which orders the transfer of an officer as a penalty from a higher
to a lower grade or post may allow him, to draw any pay, not exceeding themaximum of the lower grade or post which it may think proper :
                ! Provided that the pay allowed under this rule shall not exceed the pay
which he would have drawn under Rule 28 read with clause (b) or clause(c) as the case may be, of Rule 33.
59CHAP IV ] [ RULE 36 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
36.             If an officer is, on account of misconduct or inefficiency, reduced to a lower grade
or post or to a lower  stage in his time-scale, the authority ordering such reductionshall state the period for which it shall be effective and whether on restoration,it shall operate to postpone future increments, and, if so, to what extent.
                Ruling
                   1.     Every order passed by a competent authority imposing on a Government
servant the penalty of reduction to a lower stage in a time-scale shouldindicate :-
(i)   The date from which it will take effect and the period (in terms of
years and months) for which the penalty shall be operative.
(ii)   The stage in the time-scale (in terms of rupees) to which the
Government servant is reduced in the following form :
      “The ……………………………………. has decided that Sri
…………………should be reduced to a pay of
`````……………………………… for a period of …………………..
with effect from……   …… ……..” and
(iii)   The extent (in terms of years and months), if any, to which the
period referred to at (i) above should operate to postponefuture increments.
          It should be noted that reduction to a lower stage in a time-scale is not
permissible under the rules either for an unspecified period or as a permanentmeasure. Also when a Government servant is reduced to a particular stage,his pay will remain constant at that stage for the entire period of reduction.The period to be specified under (iii) should in no case exceed the periodspecified under (i).
                    2.   The question as to what should be the pay of a Government servant on
the expiry of the period of reduction should be decided as follows :-
60†[G O(P) No. 211/2005/Fin., Dated 11/05/2005]*[G O(P) No. 659/1964/Fin., Dated 14/01/1964. &
    G O(P) No. 262/1966/Fin., Dated 16/06/1966]CHAP IV ] PAY [ RULES 36-37
(i)    If the order of reduction lays down that the period of reduction
shall not operate to postpone future increments, the Governmentservant should be allowed the pay which he would have drawn inthe normal course but for the reduction.  If, however, the paydrawn by him immediately before reduction was below theefficiency bar he should not be allowed to cross the bar except inaccordance with the provision of Rule 32, Part I, Kerala ServiceRules.
 (ii)    *If the orders specifies that the period of reduction was to operate
to postpone future increments for any specified period, the pay ofthe Government  servant shall be fixed in accordance with (i) above,but after treating the period for which the increments were to bepostponed as not counting for increments.
37. (a)   Subject to the provisions of Rule 33 (c) and Rule 39, an officer holding a
permanent or officiating post, if appointed to officiate on a higher time-scaleof pay, will draw as initial pay the stage next above his pay in the lower time-scale irrespective of whether the pay in the lower time-scale is a stage in thehigher time-scale or not. A refixation will be allowed whenever there is changeof pay in the lower time-scale, i.e., when his pay therein becomes equal to orgreater than the pay which he draws in the higher time-scale.
    
†(b)   In the case of officiating appointments from a higher time scale of pay to a
lower time scale of pay, by direct recruitment,  the officer’s officiating pay inthe lower time  scale shall be fixed at the minimum of the scale of pay of thenew post  without considering his pay in the  higher time scale except in thecases where such appointments are made  in accordance with the SpecialRules applicable  to such appointment  and in the case of such  appointments,
61CHAP IV ] [ RULE 37 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
the Officer’s officiating pay in the new time scale shall be fixed at his officiating
pay in the  previous   appointment, if it is a stage in the new  time scale  or at
the next lower stage, if it is not a stage in the new time scale, the difference
being treated as  personal pay to be absorbed in future increases. But nothingin this sub rule shall apply to cases of reversions.
              Provided that in cases covered by sub-rules (a) and (b) other than cases of
re-employment after resignation,  removal or dismissal from public service, if
he has previously either held substantively or officiated in (i) the same post,or (ii) permanent or temporary post on the same time-scale, or (iii) a permanent
post on an identical time-scale or a temporary post (including a post in a
body, incorporated or not, which is wholly or substantially owned orcontrolled by the Government ) on an identical time-scale, then the initial
pay shall not, except in cases of reversion to the parent cadre governed by
item (iii) above, be less than the pay which he drew on the last such occasionand he shall count the period during which he drew that pay on such last
and any  previous occasions for increment in the stage of the time-scale
equivalent to that pay.  The service rendered in a post referred to in item (iii)shall, on reversion to the parent cadre, count towards initial fixation of pay
to the extent and subject to the conditions indicated below:
             (a)  the officer should have been approved for appointment to the
particular grade/post in which the previous service is to becounted;
                (b)    all his seniors, except those regarded as unfit for such appointment, were
serving in posts carrying the scale of pay in which the benefit is to beallowed or in higher posts, whether in the department itself or elsewhere,
and atleast one junior was holding a post in the department carrying the
scale of pay in which the benefit is to be allowed; and
                  (c)    the service will count from the date his junior is promoted and the  benefit
will be limited to the period the officer would have held the post in his
parent cadre had he not been appointed to the ex-cadre post.
62*[G O(P) No. 417/1978/Fin., Dated 12/04/1978]CHAP IV ] PAY [ RULE 37
               Ruling No. 1
                *When a person in a post (whether within the cadre of his service or not) is
for any reason prevented from officiating in his turn in a post on a higherscale or grade borne on the cadre of the service to which he belongs, he maybe authorised by special order of the appropriate authority proformaofficiating promotion into such scale or grade  and thereupon be granted thepay of that scale or grade if that  be more advantageous to him on suchoccasion on which the person immediately junior to him in the cadre of hisservice (or if that person had been passed over for reasons of inefficiency orunsuitability or because he is on leave or serving outside the ordinary line orforgoes officiating promotion of his own volition to that scale or grade, thenthe person next junior to him not so passed over) draws officiating salary inthat scale or grade.  But in case, where the person immediately junior to himhappens to assume charge of the post on a later date than that of another
junior, the senior who  is outside the ordinary line shall be eligible for the
benefit of proforma officiating promotion with effect from such date as theother junior assumes charge of the post:
              Provided that all persons senior to the persons to whom the benefit under
the substantive part of this rule is to be allowed are also drawing, unlessthey have been passed over for one or other of the reasons aforesaid,officiating salary in the said or some higher scale within the cadre :
             Provided further that not more than one person (either the senior most fit
person in a series of adjacent persons outside the ordinary line, or if such aperson either forgoes the benefit on  his own volition or dues not requirebenefits by virtue of his holding a post outside the ordinary line whichsecures him at least equivalent benefits in respect of salary and pensionthen the next below the series ) may be authorised to draw the salary of the
63*[G O(P) No. 393/1963/Fin., Dated  02/07/1963]CHAP IV ] [ RULE 37 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
higher scale or grade in respect of any one officiating vacancy within the
cadre filled by his junior under this rule.
   Note 1 .- A fortuitous officiating promotion given to a person who is junior to
one outside the regular line does not in itself give rise to a claim underthe ‘Next Below Rule’.
  Note 2 .- *The provisions in item (iii) of the proviso to the above rule in
respect of protection of pay and period of increment shall be applicableto Government Servants on their appointment directly or on transferfrom a post carrying identical time-scale of pay without fulfilment ofthe conditions indicated thereunder subject to the condition that thisbenefit will not be admissible to an individual who enters Governmentservice for the first time from a post in a body incorporated or notwhich is wholly or substantially owned or controlled by Government.
              Ruling No. 2
                  1.    
 †Scope of the term “outside the ordinary line”.- The expression “outside
the ordinary line” occurring in Ruling No.1 is not intended to be rigidly
interpreted as necessary  involving a post either “outside the cadre” or
“outside the ordinary time-scale”.  For  instance there are cases of officers
deputed for post-graduate, etc., training and paid training allowances onthe basis of the pay and allowances they would have drawn had theycontinued in the Department.  Training posts are also created in theDepartment to accommodate them during the period of training.  If anofficer so deputed gets a promotion in the Department it cannot be strictlystated that the officer is outside the ordinary line, as a training post hasalready been created to accommodate him within the cadre.
             2.   Seniority for the purpose of Next Below Rule.-   If Government have
approved in any Department a list of officers in the order of merit for
†[G O(P) No.610/1964/Fin., Dated 27/08/1964]
64*[G O(P) No. 24/1965/Fin., Dated 13/01/1965]CHAP IV ] PAY [ RULE 37
promotion to administrative rank or a selection grade, then that order
will prevail as the order of seniority for the purpose of the Next BelowRule, over the order of seniority of the officers in the ordinary gradationlist of their cadre.
            3.  
Promotions effected prior to the date of the Next Below  Rule.-  In
G .O.(P) 393/63/Fin., dated 2nd July 1963 it has been ordered that the
Next Below Rule would not apply to cases of promotions alreadyeffected.  It has been laid down in the second proviso to the rule that
not more than one person may be authorised to draw the salary of the
higher scale or grade in respect of any one officiating vacancy withinthe cadre filled by his junior.  A doubt may arise as to the application of
this proviso in respect of promotions effected before the date of the
rule.  This is made clear by the following illustration.  Suppose eightpersons had been given the benefit of promotion before 2
nd July 1963
outside the ordinary line against only 3 promotions within the ordinary
line.  In this case, the question of giving further promotion to the
persons outside the ordinarily line will arise only after five more personsare given promotion within the ordinary line so that all the eight persons
outside are sustained.  But those 5 persons who were given promotion
outside the ordinary line before 2
nd July 1963 will  continue to get the
benefit even after 2nd July 1963 notwithstanding the second proviso to
the ruling.
               Ruling No. 3
             *In the case of a Government servant officiating in a post and whose pay had
been re-fixed under this rule, if he is confirmed in that post with effect from a
retrospective date, the re-fixation of pay done after the date of confirmation willhave to be revised.  The over payments consequent on such revision will first
65CHAP IV ] [ RULE 37 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
be set off against arrears, if any, that might become payable to the Government
Servant for a portion of the period from the date of confirmation to the date of
issue of orders of confirmation. The balance of overpayments that cannot be set
off against the arrears, if any, shall be waived.
           This Ruling shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from  1st
November 1959.
              Ruling No. 4
              *The refixation of pay in the higher officiating post on the date of change of
pay in the lower time-scale contemplated in this rule cannot be allowed during
the period of bar on increment with or without cumulative effect. But, in thecases of bar on increment without cumulative effect, there is no objection to
give the refixation on a notional basis and to give the monetary benefit after
the expiry of the period of bar. Increments accruing in the lower substantive/officiating post from time to time cannot also be allowed during the period of
bar.
              Ruling No. 5
               **Increments barred with or without cumulative effect in the lower substantive/
officiating post shall not be reckoned for fixation/refixation of pay in the higher
time-scale. But in the case of bar on increment without cumulative effect there isno objection to grant the barred increments notionally for fixation/refixation of
pay and to give the monetary benefit after the expiry of the period of bar.
               Ruling No. 6
                #A revision of pay as contemplated in Ruling No. 3 shall not be necessary in
the case of retrospective confirmation ordered after the date of retirement of
an officer.
*[G O(P) No. 650/1972/Fin., Dated 12/12/1972]
**[G O(P) No. 150/1977/Fin., Dated 17/05/1977]
#[G O(P) No.79/1975/Fin., Dated 03/03/1975]
66*[G O(P) No. 536/1960/Fin., Dated 09/11/1960]
**[Circular No. RA1/53436/60/Fin. Dated 17/10/1960]†[G O(P) No. 89/1969/Fin., Dated 20/02/1960]CHAP IV ] PAY [ RULE 37
            The ruling shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st
November 1959.
               Government Decision No. 1
           †The rules governing fixation of pay on transfer from one appointment to
another contained in the service regulations [as modified by G.O. (P) 95/58/Fin., dated 16
th April, 1958 and  G.O. (P) 379/59/Fin., dated 22nd July 1959] are
applicable to all cases of transfers irrespective of whether the transfer is on
the basis of the advice of the Public Service Commission or not. The initialpay/salary of an officer, who while in Government service but not in a
provisional appointment is recruited by the Public Service Commission for
appointment to a post in the same department or another department willaccordingly be fixed applying the above rules. No special sanction is
necessary in such cases.
               Government Decision No. 2
              *The above order will take effect from 1
st November 1959 the date on which
Kerala Service Rules took effect.
               Government Decision No. 3
             **In the case of re-fixation of pay in the higher officiating appointment in
respect of purely officiating hands without any substantive appointment
under Government a certificate should be recorded in the fixation statement/
bill that the government servant concerned would have continued in thelower officiating appointment had he not been promoted to the higher
officiating appointment .
67#[G O(P) No. 475/1990/Fin., Dated  25/09/1990]CHAP IV ] [ RULE 37 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
               Government Decision No. 4
           #An officer officiating in a post, when appointed to a higher post on the
advice of the Public Service Commission or otherwise  is eligible for hisinitial pay being fixed under this rule and is also  entitled to the benefit ofrefixation contemplated in  the last sentence of the sub-rule (a).
             This order will be deemed to have come into force with effect from 31
st
October  1986.
               Government Decision No. 5
                The following principles will be followed for fixation of pay when the scale of
pay of a post held on a provisional  basis is revised :
                 (i)   If the pay drawn in the previous scale is less than the minimum of the
revised scale, then the pay in the revised scale may be fixed at theminimum.
                  (ii)    If the pay drawn in the previous scale is a stage in the revised scale, the
pay in the revised scale may be fixed at that stage.
                  (iii)    If the pay drawn in the previous scale is not a stage, then the pay in the
revised scale may be fixed at the next lower stage, the difference beingtreated as personal pay to be absorbed in future increase in pay.
         2.    The above principles will also be adopted for regulating the pay of an officer
holding a post on a provisional basis when appointed to a higher or a lowerpost provisionally, except in cases of reversions.
         3.    *The pay of an officer holding a post on a provisional basis when appointed
provisionally to another post on identical time-scale will be fixed in the newappointment at a stage equal to the pay he was drawing  in the previousappointment but the period during which he drew pay at that rate in theprevious appointment will not count for increment.
*[G O(P) No. 558/1975/Fin., Dated 17/12/1975]
68*[G O(P) No. 223/1977/Fin., Dated 14/07/1977]
†[G O(P) No. 811/1971/Fin., Dated 21/12/1971]**[G O(P) No. 297/1966/Fin., Dated 05/07/1966]
#[G O(P) No. 580/1970/Fin., Dated  13/08/1970]CHAP IV ] PAY [ RULE 37
        4.    **Past cases settled otherwise, will not be reopened.
               Government Decision No. 6
           # The pay drawn by an officer in an ex-cadre post can be counted for
purpose of initial fixation of pay on promotion in the parent department.But the benefit of refixation of pay contemplated in the rule is notadmissible to him as he loses connection with the ex-cadre post on
appointment to the parent department.
               *The benefit of pay drawn in an ex-cadre post for purpose of initial fixation
will not be admissible, if an officer is reverted to the parent department, to apost carrying a scale of pay lower than that of the ex-cadre post.
              
 Government Decision No. 7
            The re-fixation of  pay contemplated in the last sentence of sub-rule (a) is
admissible even in cases where the change of pay in the lower time-scale isdue to fixation of pay on account of revision of the scale of pay. If both thelower and  higher time-scales are revised, the benefit will be restricted tocases of options exercised in respect of both the posts simultaneously.
              
 Government Decision No. 8
              † The principles enunciated in paragraph (1) of  the Government Decision
No. 5 above will be adopted for regulating the pay of an officer holding apost on a provisional basis when appointed to a higher or a lower post on aregular basis also, except in cases of reversions.
                Effective from 5
th July 1966.
69CHAP IV ] [ RULE 37 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
                Government Decision No. 9
                     (i)    The pay of an officer holding a post on a provisional basis and appointed
on regular basis to another post on identical time-scale will be fixed  at astage equal to the pay he was drawing in the provisional appointment.The period during which the officer has drawn pay at that rate on theprovisional appointment will not count for increment.
                (ii)   The pay drawn by an officer in a post held by him on a provisional
basis on initial appointment to Government service through theemployment exchange or otherwise will not be reckoned forregulating his pay on appointment to another post carrying lowertime-scale on a regular basis. Cases of persons appointed to a poston a provisional basis while holding regular posts and subsequentlyappointed to another post carrying a lower time-scale on a regularbasis except cases of reversions, and cases of provisional hands
appointed to higher posts on a regular basis will continue to beregulated by the Government Decision No. 8.
           *Government Decision No. 8 will stand modified to the above extent. This
decision will take effect from 5
th July 1966. Cases already settled otherwise
will not be reopened to the disadvantage of the persons concerned.
               Government Decision No. 10
            **The pay of a provisional appointee/promotee when re-appointed/re-
promoted provisionally to the same post shall be fixed at the same stageat which he was drawing pay on the last such occasion and the periodduring which he drew pay at that stage on such last and any previousoccasions will count for increment.
*[G O(P) No. 137/1973/Fin., Dated  09/05/1973]
**[G O(P) No.50/1977/Fin., Dated 04/02/1977]
70# [G O(P) No. 218/1980/Fin., Dated 24/03/1980]CHAP IV ] PAY [ RULE 37-37A
                Government Decision No. 11
               #The pay of an officer holding a post on a regular basis and appointed on a
provisional basis to another post on identical time-scale will be fixed  at astage equal to the pay he was drawing in the regular appointment. The periodduring which the officer has drawn pay at that rate on the regular appointmentwill count for increment in the provisional appointment.
                The above decision shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 3
rd
May 1963.
37 A.    Notwithstanding the provisions contained in these rules, the pay of a
Government servant whose promotion or appointment to a post is found tobe or to have been erroneous, shall be regulated in accordance with anygeneral or special orders issued by the Government in this behalf.
             
 Government Decision
              The following provisions shall govern the pay and increments of a Government
servant whose promotion or appointment in a substantive or officiating capacityto a post is later found to be erroneous on the basis of  facts :-
                     1.   The orders of promotion or appointment of a Government servant should
be cancelled as soon as it is brought to the notice of the appointingauthority that such a promotion or appointment has resulted from a factualerror and the Government servant concerned should, immediately on suchcancellation,  be brought to the position which he would have held but forthe incorrect order of promotion or appointment.
                   2.   Service rendered by the Government servant concerned in the post he
was wrongly promoted/appointed as a result of the error should not bereckoned for the purpose of increments or for any other purpose in thatgrade/post to which he would not normally be entitled but for theerroneous promotion/ appointment.
71CHAP IV ] [ RULE 37A KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
                    3.     Any consequential promotions/appointments of other Government
servants made on the basis of the incorrect promotion/appointment
of a particular Government servant will also be regarded as erroneous
and such cases also will be regulated on the lines indicated in thepreceding paragraph.
                      4.    Except when the appointing authority is the Government, the question
whether the promotion/appointment of a particular Government servantto a post was erroneous or not should be decided by an authority next
higher than the appointing authority in accordance with the established
principles governing promotions/appointments. In cases of doubtGovernment may be consulted.
                   5.   Cases of erroneous promotion/appointment should be viewed with
serious concern and suitable disciplinary action taken against theofficers and staff responsible for such erroneous promotion/
appointment under the Kerala Civil Services (Classification, Control
and Appeal) Rules, 1960.
            6.  In the case of a Government servant who has been erroneously
promoted/appointed to a post in a substantive capacity, the
following procedure may be followed for deconfirming theGovernment servant in that post and only thereafter, the Government
servant concerned should be brought down to the position which
he would have held but for the erroneous promotion/appointment.
(a)       An order of confirmation which is clearly contrary to the relevant
statutory rules may be cancelled by the competent authority
straight away. Here the order of confirmation was ab initio  void
as it was ultra vires of the relevant rules and cancellation of the
order would be justified on the ground that there was no valid
subsisting order at all and the act of cancellation is a mereformality. The effect of cancellation would be to put the employee
concerned in a position of never having been confirmed.
72*[Memorandum No. 87/63, Dated 30/11/1963]CHAP IV ] PAY [ RULE 37A-37B
(b)      An order of confirmation which is contrary to executive orders or
administrative instructions may be cancelled by the competentauthority, if such erroneous order of confirmation has operatedto the prejudice of some identifiable person who would otherwisehave been confirmed, if the orders had been correctly applied.
                Here the order of cancellation would be just and equitable as the confirmation
of the employee concerned operates unfairly to the detriment of another employeewho would have otherwise been confirmed. Such cancellation will not have theeffect of doing any injustice to the employee whose confirmation is cancelled,since he was under the executive orders or  administrative instructions in force,not entitled to confirmation.
                It would, however, be in consonance with the principles of natural justice that a
notice to show cause why the orders of confirmation should not be cancelled begiven to the affected party in both the types of cases specified above.
                7.   *The orders re-fixing the pay in all the above cases should be issued
expressly under Rule 37A, Part I, Kerala Service Rules.
37. B  (a) Probationer in any service shall draw initial pay as follows :-
             (i)   while undergoing a course of instruction or training  the pay, if any,
specified in the ‘Special Rules’ in that behalf or by special orders ofGovernment, and
               (ii)    after completion of the course of instruction or training and when there
is no course of instruction or training, the minimum of the time-scale ofthe probation post.
         (b)     (i)     A probationer whose, period of probation is two years and whose increment is
annual shall be entitled to draw the first increment in the time-scale of the
73CHAP IV ] [ RULE 37B KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
probation post after putting in the service required to earn an increment.
The second increment shall be drawn only with effect from the date fromwhich he is declared to have completed his probation.  Delay in completing
probation will not however, affect his future increments and these will
accrue on the normal incremental dates.
                 (ii)    In the case of a probationer whose period of probation is one year and
whose increment is annual, the first increment in the scale of pay of the
probation post shall be drawn only with effect from the date on whichhe
 is declared to have completed his probation. Delay in completing
probation will not, however, affect his future increments and these will
accrue on the normal incremental dates.
  Note .- *If any period of the service of a probationer does not count for
probation, he shall complete the period of probation of one year or
two year’s duty, as the case may be, by being on duty for an equal
period from the date of expiry of one year or two years as the case
may be after the commencement of the probation. In cases where
the above period is expressed in terms of months and days, thensuch period shall be calculated as provided in Rule 12 (21) of Part I,
Kerala Service Rules. In cases where the absence is expressed in
days, the date of completion of probation shall be extended by thenumber of days of such absence.
             Effective from 4th April 1983.
        (c)   ** Subject to the provisions of Rule 39 and notwithstanding the provisions
of sub-rules (a) and (b) of this rule, an officer shall be entitled to draw in theprobation post the pay for which he would be eligible from time to time under
the provisions of Rule 28A, Rule 33 (c) or Rule 37, as the case may be.
*[G O(P) No. 163/1983/Fin., Dated 04/04/1983]
**[G O(P) No. 153/1964/Fin., Dated  08/04/1964]
74*[G O(P)  No. 632/1964/Fin., Dated  02/09/1964]CHAP IV ] PAY [ RULES 38-41
38.         When an officer officiates in a post, the pay of which has been fixed at a rate
personal to another officer the Government may permit him to draw pay atany rate not exceeding the rate so fixed or, if the rate so fixed be a time-scale,
may grant him initial pay not exceeding that lowest stage of that time-scale
and future increments not exceeding those of the sanctioned scale.
39.        The Government may in individual cases fix by special order the pay of an
officiating officer at an amount less than that admissible under these rules.
40.      The Government may issue general or special orders allowing acting
promotions to be made in place of officers who are treated as on dutyunder Rule 12 (7) (iii).
  Note .- Acting arrangements may be allowed by competent authority if the
period of training of an officer is one month or more. If it is less than a
month, no arrangements can be made except under the special sanctionof Government.
               Government Decision
                * In the case of deputation of a Government Servant for training or a course
of instruction which is treated as duty under Rule 12 (7) (iii), Part I, Kerala
Service Rules it is not necessary to create a new post in order to
accommodate him during such training or course of instruction, since thevery order sanctioning the deputation for training would be a sanction in
this behalf.
                Effective from 2
nd September 1964.
41.           Personal Pay .- Except when otherwise ordered by Government personal
pay shall be reduced by any amount by which the recipient’s pay may be
increased and shall cease as soon as his pay is increased by an amount
equal to his personal pay.
75CHAP IV ] [ RULES 42-43 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
42.          Pay of  Temporary Posts .- When a temporary post is created which may
have to be filled by a person not already in Government Service, the payof the post shall be fixed with reference  to the minimum that is necessaryto secure the services of a person capable of discharging efficiently theduties of the post.
43.         When a temporary post is created which will probably be filled by a person
who is already in the service of Government its pay should be fixed with dueregard to-
                (a)    the character and responsibility of the work to be performed, and
            (b)   the existing pay of officers of a status sufficient to warrant their
selection for the post.
  Note .- Temporary posts by this criterion should be considered as temporary
additions to the cadre of a service should be created in the time-scale
of the service ordinarily without extra remuneration. Incumbents of
these posts will therefore draw their ordinary time-scale of pay. If theposts involve decided increases in work and responsibility incomparison with the duties of  the parent cadre generally it may benecessary to sanction a special pay in addition.
76*[G O(P) No. 302/1966/Fin., Dated 07/07/1966]CHAP V ] [ RULE 44
CHAPTER  V
ADDITIONS TO PAY
44.         Compensatory Allowances .- Subject to the general rule that the amount of
compensatory allowances should be so regulated that the allowance is not
on the whole a source of profit to the recipient the Government may grant
such allowances to any officer under its control and may make rulesprescribing their amounts and the conditions under which they may be
drawn. (For rules made under the above Rule See  Appendix IV).
         I.   Unless otherwise ordered by Government, a compensatory allowance shall
ordinarily be drawn only by a Government servant actually on duty, but the
authority competent to sanction leave may in writing permit it to be drawn by
the officer on earned leave, if the whole or a considerable part of the expenseto meet which the allowance was granted continues to be incurred by him
during the leave:
                Provided the Government Servant certifies that he continued for the period
for which the allowance is claimed, to incur the whole or a considerable part
of the expense for which the allowance was granted:
               Provided further that the officer is due to return after leave to the same post or
station, as the case may be from which he proceeded on leave or to a similar post
or station for which the allowance at the same or a higher rate is admissible:
               Provided further when the Government servant on return from leave is posted
to a post other than the one from which he went on leave and both the posts
carry similar allowances but at different  rates, the Government servant shallduring leave draw the lesser of the two rates.
              I.   (A) *Subject to the second and third provisions to clause I above,
compensatory allowance granted under class VI (c) in Appendix IV
may be drawn during periods of earned leave:ADDITION OF PAY
77CHAP V ] [ RULE 44 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
                       This clause shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from
12th January 1965.
                II.    A compensatory allowance granted under class IV , Appendix IV may be
drawn during temporary transfer, if-
   (i)      the authority sanctioning the transfer certifies that the Government
servant is likely, on the expiry of the temporary duty, to return tothe station from which he is transferred ;
 (ii)    the Government servant draws no allowance of the same kind
in the post to which he is transferred;
and
(iii)    the Government servant certifies that he kept his family, for the
period for which the allowance is claimed, at the station fromwhich he proceeded on transfer.
                   III.   A compensatory allowance granted under class VI,  Appendix IV may
be drawn during temporary transfer, if-
   (i)     the authority s anctioning the transfer, certifies that the Government
servant is likely on the expiry of the transfer, to return to the postto which the allowance is attached or to another post carrying asimilar allowance; and
 (ii)     the Government servant certifies that he continued for the period
for which the allowance is claimed to incur the whole or aconsiderable part of the expenditure for which the allowance wasgranted.
  Note .-The certificate under clause (ii) above will be dispensed with when it
is inapplicable.
78**[G O(P) No.1010/1987/Fin., Dated  27/11/1987]
*[Substitution G O(P) No.135/2002/Fin., Dated 14/03/2002]
†[G O(P) No. 378/1991/Fin., Dated 01/06/1991]CHAP V ] ADDITION OF PAY [ RULES 44-45
                IV .    **If a Government servant in his old post drew compensatory allowance
granted under Class IV , or Class VI of Appendix IV (but not in an individual
capacity) and is transferred to another post, he may be allowed thecompensatory allowance during joining time as applicable to the old station
from which he was transferred.  He may also be allowed house rent allowance
during transit as applicable to the old station from which he was transferred.He shall not be allowed conveyance allowance or Permanent Travelling
Allowance.
               Government Decision No. 1
           * Notwithstanding anything contained in the second and third provisos to
Rule 44 (I), Part I Kerala Service Rules, House Rent Allowance and City
Compensatory Allowance admissible from time to time will be payable duringthe periods of leave with allowances, including leave preparatory to
retirement, if the total period of such leave at a time does not exceed 180 days
or if the actual duration  of the leave exceeds 180 days, for the first 180 daysof such leave.
               *This shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 25
th July, 1995.
            Government Decision No.2
  †[Deleted]
45.         The Government may make rules or issue orders laying down the principles
governing the allotment to officers, for use by them as residences, of suchbuildings owned or leased by it, or such portions thereof, as the Government
may make available for the purpose.  Such rules or orders may lay down
different principles for observance in different localities or in respect ofdifferent classes of residence, and may prescribe the circumstances in which
such an officer shall be considered to be in occupation of a residence.
79CHAP V ] [ RULES 46-47 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
46.          Fees .-   The Government may permit an officer, if it be satisfied that this can
be done without detriment to his official duties or responsibilities, to performa specified service or series of services for a private person or body or for apublic body including a body administering a local fund or for anotherGovernment and to receive as remuneration therefore, if the service be materiala non recurring or recurring fee.
  Note .-  This rule does not apply to the acceptance of fees from private
persons by medical officers in Government employ for professionalattendance which is regulated by separate orders of Government.
47.        No officer may undertake work for another Government, or a private or
public body or a private person, or accept fee therefore, without thesanction of the Government.
  Note .-  Heads of department, while forwarding their recommendations in
such cases shall unless the officer is on leave, specifically state whetherthe work can be undertaken  by the officer concerned without detrimentto his official duties and responsibilities.
               Government Decision
            *In respect of examinations conducted by the Education Department, the
Public Service Commission, the University  etc.,  it is not necessary to accordindividual sanction for acceptance of remuneration in every case ofGovernment servant undertaking such work.  Any officer of Government,who is called upon to undertake work in connection with the examination,conducted by the following examining bodies, will be permitted to acceptsuch assignment and the remuneration therefore with effect from 1
st
November 1959:-
*[G O(P) No. 193/1960/Fin., Dated 12/04/1960, G O(Ms) No. 45/1961/Fin., Dated 03/02/1961  &
G O(P) No. 386/1971/Fin., Dated 05/07/1971]
80*[G O(P) No. 389/1965/Fin., Dated 11/10/1965]
# [G O(P) No. 1248/1997/Fin., Dated 10/12/1997]†[G O(P) No. 296/1966/Fin.,  Dated 04/07/1966]CHAP V ] ADDITION OF PAY [ RULES 47-48
              1.   The Kerala University and other Universities.
                2.   The Union Public Service  Commission, the Public Service Commission of
the States and the Secretarial Training School, Cabinet Secretariat of theGovernment of India.
              3.   The London Chamber of Commerce.
              4.   The Departments of this Government.
                5.   The Forest Research Institute and Colleges, Dehra Dun and Coimbatore.
          6. 
 †The Kerala State Co-operative Union in respect of Co-operative Subordinate
Personnel Training Examination.
                    The item No.6 shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 10th
May 1966.
48.          *Unless the Government by special order otherwise direct, one-third of any
non-recurring fee exceeding # ````` 2000 or one-third of any recurring fee
exceeding # ````` 1250 a year, paid to an officer, shall be credited to the General
Revenues.
   Note 1 .-  If any fee to which this rule applies exceeds # ````` 2000 non-recurring
or # ````` 1250 a year recurring one-third of the total amount payable
should be credited to the General Revenues, provided that the amountretained by the officer concerned will not, merely owing to the operationof this rule, be reduced below # `````
 2000, if non-recurring or  # `````1250 a
year if recurring.
               Non-recurring and recurring fees should be dealt with separately and should
not be added for the purpose of crediting one-third to General Revenues
81CHAP V ]  [ RULES 48-49 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
under this rule.  In the case of the former,  the limit of # ````` 2000 prescribed in
this rule should be applied in each individual case, and in the case of the latterthe limit of # ````` 1250 should be applied with reference to the total recurring
fees for the financial year.
              #This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 26
th
July 1995.
  Note 2 .-The above rule does not apply to fees received by officers from a
University or other examining body in return for their services asexaminers or from the revenues of another Government in return fortheir services to that Government* and also to the royalties receivedby officers from the publishers for the sale of the books written bythem even with the aid of knowledge acquired during the course oftheir service.
             *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 11
th
October 1971.
49.           Honoraria .- The Government may grant or permit an officer to receive an
honorarium as remuneration for work performed which is occasional incharacter and either so laborious or of such special merit as to justify aspecial reward. Except when special reasons, which should be recordedin writing exist, for a departure from this provision, sanction to the grant or
acceptance of an honorarium should not be given unless the work has beenundertaken with the prior consent of the Government and its amount hasbeen settled in advance.
               Government Decision No. 1
             
 † The following allowances will be classified as honoraria under this rule :
# [G O(P) No. 1248/1997/Fin., Dated 10/12/1997]
†[G O(P) No. 576/1963/Fin., Dated 07/11/1963]
82**[G O(P) No. 155/1970/Fin., Dated 07/03/1970]CHAP V ] ADDITION OF PAY [ RULES 49-50
                1.   Overtime allowance.
               2.    Allowance given to Wardens and Assistant Wardens of hostels.
               Government Decision No. 2
             **When State Government Officers required to attend the meetings of the
Interview Board of the Kerala Public Service Commission are not eligible forTravelling Allowance under the rules, they shall be paid an honorariumequivalent to the daily allowance admissible under Rule 39, Part II, KeralaService Rules.
                 Effective from 22
nd January 1969.
               Government Decision No. 3
            The conditions of prior consent and the settlement of the amount in advance
referred to in the last sentence of this rule will not apply to any work ordered tobe done at Government level.
               Government Decision No.  4
         When members of the Boards for various examinations conducted by the
Commissioner for Government Examinations required to attend to the meetingsof the Boards are not entitled to Travelling Allowance and Daily Allowanceunder the rules, they shall be paid an honorarium equivalent to the DailyAllowance admissible under Rule 39, Part II, Kerala Service Rules.
            This decision will be deemed to have come into force with effect from 17
th
January 1972.
50.            Fees and Honoraria .- In the case of both fees and honoraria the sanctioning
authority shall record in writing that due regard has been paid to the generalprinciple enunciated in Rule 14 and shall record also the reasons whichin his opinion justify the grant of the extra remuneration.
83CHAP V ] [ RULES 51-52 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
51.          Any officer is eligible to receive without special permission-
            (a)   the premium awarded for an essay or plan in public competition;
           (b)   any reward offered for the arrest of a criminal or for information or
special service in connection with the administration of justice;
         (c)   any reward payable in accordance with the provisions of any Act or
Regulation or Rules framed thereunder;
               (d)     any reward sanctioned for services in connection with the administration
of the customs and excise laws;
               (e)   any fees payable to an officer for the duties which he is required to
perform in his official capacity under any special law or by order ofGovernment; and
         (f)  any remuneration paid by the All India Radio for professional
performances in its programmes,  such as music, drama and the like.
   Note .-Sanction of the authorities mentioned below is, however, necessary
for accepting remuneration for giving talks over the All India Radio byGovernment Officers:
Name  of  Officers  giving  the  talk        Name o f  authority  whose  permission
                                                                                           is required
              Chief Secretary and Secretaries Minister concerned
              Heads of department Secretaries concerned
Officers subordinate to Heads of
DepartmentsHeads of Departments
52.        An officer whose duties involve the carrying out of scientific or technical
research shall not apply for or obtain, or cause or permit any other person toapply for or obtain, a patent for an invention made by such officer save withthe permission of the Government and in accordance with such conditionsas the Government may impose.
84†[G O(P) No. 342/1965/Fin., Dated 31/08/1965]
**[G O(P) No. 635/2002/Fin., Dated 19/10/2002]
*[Substitution G O(P) No. 467/2012/Fin., Dated 21/08/2012 (with effect from 01/02/2011)]CHAP VI ]       [ RULE 53 COMBINATION OF APPOINTMENTS
CHAPTER  VI
COMBINATION OF APPOINTMENTS
53. (a)   A competent authority may appoint an officer to hold substantively or to
officiate in two or more  independent posts at one time.
       (b)   †The competent authority who appoints an officer to hold or to officiate in
a second post in addition to his own, will declare whether he officiates in orholds full charge of the additional post or is appointed merely to dischargethe current duties. It should also specify in each case the amount  of **specialallowance, if any, to be  granted, the amount being subject to the followinglimits :-
            (1)   If an officer is appointed to officiate in a second post and to hold in
addition full charge of his own post, he may be allowed to draw thehighest pay to which he would be entitled if his appointment to one ofthe posts stood alone **and in addition special allowance which shouldnot exceed * 6 per cent of the minimum of the scale of pay of other postwith effect from the 1
st day of  February, 2011 or the date of change over
to the revised scale ordered in G.O.(P) No.85/2011/Fin. dated the 26th
February, 2011, which ever is later.The highest pay referred to abovemay be specifically reduced by the competent authority at its discretion.
                        If  compensatory allowance is attached to one of the posts, he may be
permitted to draw it in full and if compensatory allowances are attachedto more than one of the posts, the allowance which may be granted tohim should not exceed the larger allowance.
             (2)    If the officer is appointed to hold full charge of one or more posts in
addition to his own, the **special allowance which may be granted to
85CHAP VI ] [ RULE 53 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
*[Substitution G O(P) No. 467/2012/Fin., Dated 21/08/2012 (with effect from 01/02/2011)]
**[G O(P) No. 635/2002/Fin., Dated 19/10/2002]
† [G O(P) No. 225/2002/Fin., Dated 15/04/2002]him in respect of each additional post should not exceed *6 per cent of
the minimum of the scale of that post with effect from the 1st day of
February, 2011 or the date of change over to the revised scale orderedin G.O.(P). No.85/2011/Fin. dated the 26
th February, 2011, which ever is
later.The drawal of compensatory allowances will be regulated as inthe sub-para under clause (1) above.
              (3)     If  the officer is appointed to discharge only the current duties of one or
more posts in addition to his own, the **special allowance which may begranted to him in respect of each additional post should not exceed *3 percent of the minimum of the scale of pay of that post with effect from the 1
st
day of February, 2011 or the date of change over to the revised scaleordered in G.O(P) No. 85/2011/Fin dated the 26
th February, 2011, which ever
is later, in addition to the pay and compensatory allowances, if any,admissible in his regular post.
        (c)    No **special allowance should be granted unless the previous incumbent of
the additional post held, has actually given over charge thereof under ordersof competent authority and unless the period of additional charge exceedsfourteen working days in the case of full additional charge and one month inthe case of discharge of current duties only. 
†The drawal of **special
allowance should not be allowed for a period exceeding three months on anyaccount.
                    †This shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 9th March
1998.
              ** This shall be deemed to have come into force on 1st March, 1997.
86*[G O(P) No. 312/1963/Fin., Dated 29/05/1963]CHAP VI ] [ RULE 53 COMBINATION OF APPOINTMENTS
        (d)   [Deleted].
        (e)   Additional remuneration should not be allowed as a matter of course or
granted when the extra duties to be performed are only nominal orcomparatively light. Additional remuneration should not be allowed duringany period of vacation unless the additional duty is actually performedduring such period.
               Ruling
                 The term ‘independent’ occurring in the above rule should be interpreted
as meaning separate or distinct involving independent duties andresponsibilities and the post subordinate to the one held by the officershould not be taken as independent under the rule.
               Government Decision No. 1
          *At present charge allowance of the non gazetted officer for his holding
additional charge of a gazetted post is being authorised by the office of theAccountant General based on the sanction of competent authorities, in thesame way as pay and allowances of a gazetted officer is concerned. Thispractice has since been reviewed in the light of the procedure followed insome of the Audit and Account offices of other States. It has been decidedthat no authorisation from the office of the Accountant General is necessaryin case of additional charge arrangements from 1
st April 1963 onwards, as
holding of additional charge of a gazetted post does not alter the status of anon gazetted officer to that of a gazetted officer.
              According to the changed procedure, the additional charge allowance will
be drawn and paid by the Head of Office in the same manner as his regularpay and allowances are drawn. The Drawing Officer should however satisfyhimself that there is proper sanction of the competent authority for the
87CHAP VI ] [ RULE 53-53A KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
additional charge arrangements and that the officer has actually held the
additional charge of the post during the period for which the charge allowanceis drawn and also that the rate of allowance sanctioned and drawn is as perrules etc. The charge allowance thus drawn may be continued to be debitedto the same head of account to which the pay of the non-gazetted officer isdebited.
            In the case of a non gazetted officer holding additional charge of the
duties of the Head of an Office, who is a gazetted officer and also adrawing and disbursing officer, the procedure adopted for the drawal ofhis normal pay and allowances may be followed for the drawal  of chargeallowance also.
               Government Decision No. 2
                  
†The following criteria will be followed to distinguish between ‘full additional
charge’ and ‘discharge of current duties’:-
          (i)   An officer appointed to hold ‘full additional charge’ of a post has to
perform all the administrative, financial and statutory functions andduties in respect of that post.
                (ii)    An officer appointed to discharge current duties of a post need attend
only to the work of a routine nature in respect of that post.
53A.    **The posts in respect of which additional charge arrangements may be
ordered shall be as classified below:-
       (I)   Posts not  in the same office, establishment or line of promotion or cadre .-
Where the duties and responsibilities are clearly independent and are eligiblefor *special allowance, e.g., Labour Commissioner, holding charge of the
†[G O(P) No. 319/1972/Fin., Dated  31/07/1972]
**[G O(P) No. 132/1987/Fin., Dated  10/02/1987]
*[G O(P) No. 635/2002/Fin., Dated  19/10/2002]
88CHAP VI ] COMBINATION OF APPOINTMENTS [ RULE 53A
post of Registrar of Co-operative Societies and Joint Secretary to Government
holding charge of post of a Head of Department.
               This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force on 1st March,
1997.
   (II)   Posts in the same office, establishment or line of promotion or cadre .-
Cases of this nature shall further be divided as follows :-
               (a)    When the additional post is subordinate to the regular post, *special
allowance shall not be admissible e.g., Superintendent of Police holdingcharge of the post of Assistant Superintendent of Police or DeputySuperintendent of Police and District Collector holding the charge ofthe post of Revenue Divisional Officer under him.
  Note .- The reason for the non-grant of *special allowance  In the above
cases is that the superior officer is expected to supervise the work ofthe subordinates and the additional charge arrangements should notentitle him to extra remuneration.  The work of the additional postshould be redistributed among other subordinates in such a way thateach one’s load of work is increased to a small extent that no one needbe given *special allowance.
                 (b)    When the additional post is of equivalent and of the same rank as that
of the regular post the following principles shall apply:
(1)       If additional charge arrangements are in respect of different territorial
jurisdictions, the posts are definitely independent and in such cases*special allowance shall be admissible, e.g., Revenue DivisionalOfficer of one district/division holding charge of another district/division and one Block Development Officer holding charge ofanother block.
*[G O(P) No. 635/2002/Fin., Dated  19/10/2002]
89*[G O(P) No. 635/2002/Fin., Dated  19/10/2002]CHAP VI ] [ RULE 53A KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
 (2)    If additional charge arrangements are in respect of  posts in the
same office and of the same rank, *special allowance shall not beadmissible if the duties of the additional post are identical in natureand if the responsibilities are such as can easily be spread outamong others holding the same post, e.g., if a Deputy Collectorgoes on leave and if the Collector has a number of Deputy Collectorsworking under him, he should consider whether he can distributethe responsibilities of the Deputy Collector on leave to the otherDeputy Collectors so as not to increase substantially each one’sload of work.
        This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force on 1
st
March, 1997
  (3)    If the additional charge arrangements are in the same office and
if the responsibilities attached to the post are indivisible andcannot be distributed to more than one officer, special allowance*shall be admissible.  In such cases, a certificate to the effect thatthe responsibilities of the post held in additional charge are notdivisible, should be furnished by the competent authority, {**}e.g. Deputy Director of Animal Husbandry (Key Village) or DeputyDirector of Animal Husbandry (Veterinary) or Deputy Director ofAnimal Husbandry (Extension) holding charge of the other post.
       This shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 13
th October,
1995.
      (c)   When the additional post is superior to the regular post and is carrying higher
scale of pay *special allowance shall be admissible, e.g., Deputy Secretary orJoint Secretary  to Government holding charge of the post of Additional Secretary
**[Omitted G O(P) No. 242/2002/Fin., Dated 22/04/2002]
90**[Substitution G O(P) No. 218/2005/Fin., Dated 11/05/2005]
! [Insertion G O(P) No. 76/2007/Fin., Dated 27/02/2007]CHAP VI ] COMBINATION OF APPOINTMENTS [ RULE 53A
or  Secretary to Government and a Superintendent of Police or Assistant Inspector
General of Police holding charge of the post of Deputy Inspector General ofPolice.
              This shall be deemed to have come into force on 1
st day of March, 1997
             (d)   ** All India Service Officers, State Government Officers and Judicial
Officers who are in the scale of pay of Secretary to Government andabove shall not be eligible for charge allowance for holding additionalcharge of other posts.
  !Note .- Clause (d) shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from
13
th October, 1995 in respect of All India Service Officers and 7th
November, 2002 in respect of others.
91CHAP VII ] [ RULES 54-55 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
CHAPTER  VII
DISMISSAL, REMOV AL AND SUSPENSION
54.          The pay and allowances of an officer who is dismissed or removed from
service cease from the date of such dismissal or removal.
55.      #An officer under suspension or deemed to have been placed under
suspension by an order of the appointing authority is entitled to thefollowing payments:-
               ** [Deleted] Subsistence  allowance at an amount equal to *the leave salary
which the officer would have drawn had he been on leave on half-pay on thedate of suspension; but the benefit of any increase in pay due to incrementfalling due during the period of suspension will not be admissible during theperiod.
                This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1
st
April 1973.
               † [Deleted]
                ** † This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. from 6th
March, 1997.
           In addition, he may be granted to such extent and subject to such
conditions as the authority ordering his suspension may direct-
              (i)   Dearness allowance and Dearness pay not exceeding the amount
admissible as such had he been on leave on leave salary equal tothe rate of subsistence allowance payable from time to time.
# [G O(P) No.573/1978/Fin., Dated 14/07/1978]
* [G O(P) No.158/1977/Fin., Dated 24/05/1977]
[G O(P) No.547/1978/Fin., Dated 26/06/1978]
**
† [G O(P) No.133/02/Fin., Dated 14/03/2002]
92*[G O(P) No. 141/1972/Fin., Dated 12/05/1972]
**[G O(P) No. 83/1980/Fin., Dated 23/01/1980]
#[Addition G O(P) No. 56/2006/Fin., Dated 03/02/2006]CHAP VII ] DISSMISSAL, REMOV AL AND SUSPENSION [ RULE 55
               (ii)     Any other compensatory allowance of which he was in receipt on the
date of suspension.
   Note 1.- If an officer under suspension is dismissed with retrospective effect
no recovery is necessary of the subsistence grant already paid to him.
  Note 2 .-(a)  Deductions shall be made from the subsistence allowance on
account of the following :-
                 (i)     Income Tax and Super Tax (provided the employees annual income
calculated with reference to subsistence allowance is taxable).
               (ii)      House rent and allied charges i.e., electricity, water, furniture etc.
                (iii)     Repayment of loans and advances, taken from Government at such
rates as the Head of the Department deems appropriate.
               (iv)     *Amounts due to Co-operative Stores and Co-operative Credit Societies.
               (v)      **Subscription to the Family Benefit Scheme, if the officer is a subscriber
to the scheme.
          (vi)    #Subscription to the Group Insurance Scheme, if the officer is a
subscriber to the scheme.
                         # This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 6th July,
2002
              (b)   Deduction on account of the following shall be optional: -
                (i)     Premia due on Postal Life Insurance Policies and State Life Insurance
Policies-Official Branch.
               (ii)     Refund of advances taken from General Provident Fund.
93CHAP VII ] [ RULE 55 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
                         The written consent of the officer should be obtained in the case of these
optional deductions.
            C.   Deductions of the following nature should not be made from the subsistence
allowance:-
    (i)     Subscription to a General Provident Fund.
   (ii)     Amount due to Court attachments.
  (iii)      Recovery of loss to Government for which an officer is responsible.
       (d)   As regards recovery of overpayments, there is no bar to effect the same
from the  subsistence allowance, but such recoveries of overpaymentsshould not ordinarily be made at a rate greater than one-third of theamount of the subsistence allowance i.e., exclusive of dearness allowanceif any, admissible to him.
  Note 3 .- No payment under the rules shall be made unless the officer furnishes
a certificate that he is not engaged in any other employment, business,profession or vocation. In the case of non-gazetted officers, thecertificate signed by the officer should be countersigned by a gazettedofficer, in token of acceptance. It should then be attached to  the bill inwhich subsistence allowance for the period covered by the  certificateis claimed. In the case of gazetted officers payment of subsistenceallowance will be authorised by the Accountant General on the basisof the sanction issued by the competent authority and the TreasuryOfficer will pay the allowance only if a similar countersigned certificateis attached to the bill claiming it.
  Note 3A .-*Compensatory allowance under clause (ii) above may be granted
provided the officer certifies that for the period for which the allowanceis claimed, he continued to incur the whole or a considerable part of
*[G O(P) No. 320/1968/Fin., Dated 26/06/1968]
94*[G O(P) No. 58/2006/Fin., Dated 04/02/2006]
**[G O(P) No. 549/1988/Fin., Dated 31/08/1988]
# [G O(P) No. 907/1997/Fin., Dated  24/10/1997]CHAP VII ] DISSMISSAL, REMOV AL AND SUSPENSION [ RULE 55-55B
the expense to meet which the allowance was granted.  The maximum
period for which the compensatory allowance may be paid shall be
limited to *180 days.
  *  This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 25th July,
1995.
  Note 4 .- In the case of an officer under suspension before 27th July 1962
recovery of House Construction Advance shall be limited to 1/3 of thesubsistence allowance or the usual rate of monthly instalment whichever
is lower. No penal interest shall be levied on the defaulted portion of
the instalment.
  This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from
25
th July, 1995.
55A.      **[Deleted]
                This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 3rd
February 1988.
55B. (i)  #Notwithstanding any thing contained in Rule 55, when an officer is placed
under suspension while on leave without allowances, he shall not be eligible
for any subsistence allowance during the period of the leave.  On the expiry
of the leave if he continues to be on suspension,  he shall be entitled to thesubsistence allowance.  If he is reinstated before the expiry of the leave, he
shall continue to be on leave till its expiry, unless the officer other wise
desires.
        (ii)   In the case of an Officer on leave with allowances, the orders of suspension
shall have the effect of cancelling the leave for the period of suspension.  He
shall be entitled to subsistence allowance.
95CHAP VII ] [ RULE 56 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
56. (1)   When an officer who has been dismissed, removed or compulsorily retired
including an officer who has been compulsorily retired under Rule 60A, isreinstated as a result of appeal or review or would have been so reinstated,but for his retirement on superannuation while under suspension or not, theauthority competent to order reinstatement shall consider and make a specificorder-
             (a)    regarding the pay and allowances to be paid to the officer for the
period of his absence from duty including the period of suspensionpreceding his dismissal, removal, or compulsory retirement, as thecase may be,
           (b)    whether or not the said period shall be treated as a period spent on duty,
and
              (c)    in the case of an officer who was compulsorily retired under Rule
60A and subsequently reinstated, for the recovery of the relevantbenefits, if any, already paid to him.
      (2)   Where the authority competent to order reinstatement is of opinion that
the officer who had been dismissed, removed or compulsorily retired,has been fully exonerated, the officer shall, subject to the provisions ofsub-rule (6) be paid the full pay and allowances to which he would havebeen entitled had he not been dismissed, removed or compulsorily retiredor suspended prior to such dismissal, removal or compulsory retirementas the case may be:
          Provided that where such authority is of opinion that the termination of the
proceedings instituted against the officer had been delayed for reasons directlyattributable to the officer, it may, after giving him an opportunity to make hisrepresentation and after considering the representation,  if any, submitted byhim, direct, for reasons to be recorded in writing, that the officer shall subject tothe provisions of sub-rule (7), be paid for the period of such delay, only suchamount (not being the whole) of such pay and allowances as it may determine.
96CHAP VII ] DISSMISSAL, REMOV AL AND SUSPENSION [ RULE 56
         (3)   In a case falling under sub-rule (2), the period of absence from duty including
the period of suspension preceding dismissal, removal or compulsory
retirement as the case may be, shall be treated as a period spent on duty forall purposes.
        (4)    In cases other than those covered by sub-rule (2) including cases where the
order of dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement from service is set aside
by the appellate or reviewing authority solely on the ground of non-
compliance with the requirements of clause (2) of Article 311 of the Constitutionand no further enquiry is proposed to be held, the officer shall, subject to the
provisions of  sub-rules (6) and (7) be paid such amount (not being the
whole) of the pay and allowances to which he would have been entitled, hadhe not been dismissed, removed or compulsorily retired or suspended prior
to such dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement as the case may be, as
the competent authority may determine, after giving notice to the officer ofthe quantum proposed and after considering the representation, if any,submitted by him in that connection within such period as may be specified
in the notice:
            Provided that except in the case of such officers as are governed by the
provisions of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (Central Act 4 of 1936), any
payment under this sub-rule shall be restricted to a period of three yearsimmediately preceding reinstatement or retirement on superannuation, as
the case may be.
         (5)    In a case falling under sub-rule (4), the period of absence from duty including
the period of suspension preceding his dismissal, removal or compulsory
retirement, as the case may be, shall not be treated as a period spent on duty,
unless the competent authority specifically directs that it shall be so treatedfor any specified purpose:
                Provided that if the officer so desires such authority may direct that the
period of absence from duty including the period of suspension preceding
97CHAP VII ] [ RULE 56 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
his dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement, as the case may be,
shall be converted into leave of any kind due and admissible to theofficer
.
   Note 1 .- The order of the competent authority under the  preceding proviso
shall be absolute and no higher sanction shall be necessary for thegrant of -
  (a)   Leave without allowances in excess of three months in the case of
a temporary officer; and
  (b)    Leave of any kind in excess of  five  years in the case of a permanent
officer.
  *Note 2 .-The leave of any kind due and admissible referred to in the proviso
shall include commuted leave also.
    (6)  The payment of allowances under sub-rule (2) or sub-rule (4) shall be
subject to all other conditions under which such allowances areadmissible.
       (7)    The amount (not being the whole) of such pay and allowances determined
under the provision to sub-rule (2) or under sub-rule (4) shall not be lessthan the subsistence allowance and other allowances admissible underRule 55.
       (8)    Any payment made under this rule to an officer on his reinstatement shall be
subject to adjustment of the amount, if any, earned by him through anemployment during the period between the date of removal, dismissal orcompulsory retirement, as the case may be, and the date of reinstatement.Where the emoluments admissible under this rule are equal to or less than theamounts earned during the employment elsewhere, nothing shall be paid tothe officer.
*[G O(P) No. 839/1992/Fin., Dated 04/11/1992]
98CHAP VII ] DISSMISSAL, REMOV AL AND SUSPENSION [ RULE 56A
56A. (1)  Where the dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement of an officer is
set aside by a Court of Law and such officer is reinstated without holdingany further inquiry the period of absence from duty shall be regularisedand the officer shall be paid pay and allowances in accordance with theprovisions of sub-rule (2) or sub-rule (3) subject to the directions, if any,of the court.
      (2)  Where the dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement of an officer is set
aside by the court solely on the ground of non-compliance with therequirements of clause (2) of Article 311 of the Constitution, and where he isnot exonerated on merits, the pay and allowances to be paid to the officer forthe period intervening between the date of dismissal, removal or compulsoryretirement including the period of suspension preceding such dismissal,removal or compulsory retirement, as the case may be, and the date ofreinstatement shall be determined by the competent authority and the saidperiod shall be regularised, in accordance with the provisions contained insub-rule (4), (5) and (7) of Rule 56.
        (3)   If the dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement of an officer is set
aside by the court on the merits of the case, the period interveningbetween the date of dismissal, removal or compulsory retirementincluding the period of suspension preceding such dismissal, removalor compulsory retirement, as the case may be, and the date ofreinstatement shall be treated as duty for all purposes and he shallbe paid the full pay and allowances for the period, in which he wouldhave been entitled, had he not been dismissed, removed orcompulsorily retired or suspended prior to such dismissal, removalor compulsory retirement, as the case may be.
     (4)  The payment of allowances under sub-rule (2) or sub-rule (3) shall be
subject to all other conditions under which such allowances areadmissible.
99CHAP VII ] [ RULE 56A-56B KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
        (5)    Any payment made under this rule to an officer on his reinstatement shall be
subject to adjustment of the amount, if any, earned by him through anemployment during the period between the date of dismissal, removal or
compulsory retirement and the date of reinstatement. Where the emoluments
admissible under this rule are equal to or less than those earned during theemployment elsewhere, nothing shall be paid to the officer.
56B.(1)  When an officer who has been suspended is reinstated or would have
been so reinstated but for his retirement on superannuation while undersuspension, or has retired from service on superannuation before the
conclusion of the disciplinary proceedings against him the authority
competent to order reinstatement shall consider and make a specific order.
             (a)   regarding the pay and allowances to be paid to the officer for the
period of suspension ending with reinstatement or the date of hisretirement on superannuation, as the case may be; and
                 (b)   whether or not the said period shall be treated as a period spent on
duty.
    (2)  Notwithstanding anything contained in Rule 55, where an officer under
suspension dies before the disciplinary, or court proceedings instituted
against him are concluded, the period between the date of suspension andthe date of death shall be treated as duty for all purposes and his family shall
be paid the full pay and allowances for that period to which he would have
been entitled had he not been suspended, subject to adjustment in respect ofsubsistence allowance already paid.
        (3)   Where the authority competent to order reinstatement is of the opinion that
the suspension was wholly unjustified, the officer shall, subject to the
provisions of sub-rule (8) be paid the full pay and allowances to which he
would have been entitled, had he not been suspended:
100CHAP VII ] DISSMISSAL, REMOVAL AND SUSPENSION [ RULE 56B
                Provided that where such authority is of the opinion that the termination of
the proceedings instituted against the officer had been delayed owing toreasons directly attributable to the officer, it may after giving him anopportunity to make his representation and after considering therepresentation, if any, submitted by him, direct, for reasons to be recorded inwriting, that the officer shall be paid for the period of such delay only suchamount (not being the whole) of such pay and allowances as it may determine.
       (4)    In a case falling under sub-rule (3), the period of suspension shall be treated
as a period spent on duty for all purposes.
       (5)    In cases other than those falling under sub-rules (2) and (3), the officer shall
subject to the provisions of sub-rules (8) and (9) be paid such amount (notbeing the whole) of the pay and allowances to which he would have beenentitled had he not been suspended, as the competent authority may determine,after giving notice to the officer of the quantum proposed and after consideringthe representation, if any, submitted by him in connection within such periodas may be specified in the notice.
       (6)   Where suspension is revoked pending finalisation of the disciplinary or
court proceedings, any order passed under sub-rule (1) before theconclusion of the proceedings against the officer shall be reviewed onits own motion after the conclusion of the proceedings by the  authoritymentioned in sub-rule (1) who shall make an order according to theprovisions of sub-rule (3) or sub-rule ( 5), as the case may be.
     (7)   In a case falling under sub-rule (5), the period of suspension shall not be
treated as a period spent on duty unless the competent authority specificallydirects that it shall be so treated for any specified purpose:
               Provided that if the officer so desires, such authority may order that the
period of suspension shall be converted into leave of any kind due andadmissible to the officer.
101CHAP VII ] [ RULE 56B KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
  Note 1 .-The order of the competent authority under the preceding proviso
shall be absolute and no higher sanction shall be necessary for thegrant of-
    (a)   leave without allowances in excess of three months in the case of a
temporary officer, and
    (b)   leave of any kind in excess of  five years in the case of  a permanent
officer.
   Note 2 .-*The leave of any kind due and admissible referred to in the proviso
shall include commuted leave also.
     (8)   The payment of allowances under sub-rule (2), sub-rule (3) or sub-rule (5)
shall be subject to all other conditions under which such allowances areadmissible.
        (9)     **The amount (not being the whole) of such pay and allowances determined
under the proviso to sub-rule (3) or under sub-rule (5) shall not be less than
the subsistence allowance and other allowances admissible under Rule 55.
  Note 1 .- The amount of subsistence allowance already drawn should be
adjusted against the pay and allowances or proportion of them grantedunder Rules 56, 56A or 56B or leave salary which may be granted to theofficer.
  Note 2 .- The orders of revocation of suspension or of  reinstatement after
dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement from service take effectfrom the date of the order and the intervening period, i.e., the periodfrom the date of order to the date of joining duty shall be regularisedby granting joining time and/or leave due and admissible to the officerconcerned. However, cases where there is an abnormal time-lag between
*[G O(P) No. 839/1992/Fin., Dated  04/11/1992]
**[G O(P) No. 573/1978/Fin., Dated 14/07/1978]
102*[Insertion G O(P) No. 633/2010/Fin., Dated 25/11/2010 (with effect from 24/08/2007)]
** [G O(P) No. 83/1980/Fin., Dated 23/01/1980]†[G O(P) No. 442/1981/Fin., Dated 10/07/1981]CHAP VII ] DISSMISSAL, REMOV AL AND SUSPENSION [ RULE 56B
the date of such order and the date on which the  officer concerned
reports for duty shall be decided by Government, on merits.
  Note 3 .- †When a period of suspension is ordered to be converted into
leave, the amount of subsistence allowance and compensatoryallowances already received in excess of the leave salary and allowancesadmissible on such conversion, shall be refunded. *However, no refundof subsistence allowance shall be necessary, where the suspensionordered on or after 24
th August, 2007, is converted into leave without
allowances for want of sufficient number of leave with allowances tothe credit of the Officer concerned.
                          Effective from 10
th July 1981.
  Note 3A .- **If the officer is a subscriber to the Family Benefit Scheme who
has received the payment due under the scheme and desires to availhimself of the benefit of the scheme, he shall refund the entire amountreceived. In addition, he shall also make the contribution for the periodof service from the date of dismissal, removal or compulsory retirementto the date of reinstatement, in case the period is ordered to be countedas duty for all purposes  including pay and allowances. In caseshowever where the period is ordered to be treated  as eligible leave,the subscriber need make his contribution only for period of eligibleleave for which he is entitled to get full or half pay.
  Note 4 .- A permanent post vacated by the dismissal, removal, compulsory
retirement or reduction of a Government servant to a lower service,grade or post or to a lo wer time-scale should not be filled substantively
103CHAP VII ] [ RULE 56B KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
until the expiry of the period of one year from the date of such dismissal,
removal, compulsory retirement or reduction, as the case may be.  Whereon the expiry of the period of one year, the permanent post is filled andthe original incumbent of the post is reinstated thereafter, he should beaccommodated against any post which may be substantively vacantin the grade to which his previous substantive post, belonged.  If thereis no such vacant post, he should be accommodated against asupernumerary post which should  be created in this grade with propersanction and with the stipulation that it would be terminated on theoccurrence of the first substantive vacancy in that grade.
  Note 5 .- If an officer under suspension is dismissed *or removed with
retrospective effect from the date of suspension, no recovery shouldbe made of the subsistence allowance already paid to him, and arrearsof subsistence allowance, if any, due to him upto the date of the orderdismissing *or removing him should be paid to him. The arrears ofsubsistence allowance due to the officer should not be adjusted againstany amounts due from him to Government.
  Note 6 .- If an officer under suspension is compulsorily retired with
retrospective effect from the date of suspension, the pension due tothe officer from the date of such retirement to the date of the ordercompulsorily retiring him shall be with held if the rate of pension islower than or equal to the rate of subsistence allowance granted tohim.  In case the pension happens to be higher than the subsistenceallowance granted the difference shall be paid to the officer.  (Note 6shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 22
nd August
1960).
* [G O(P) No. 46/1980/Fin., Dated 15/01/1980]
104*[G O(P) No. 73/1966/Fin., Dated 01/03/1966]
** [G O(P) No. 593/1963/Fin., Dated 21/11/1963]
# [G O(P) No. 273/1973/Fin., Dated 11/07/1973]
†[G O(P) No. 266/1967/Fin., Dated  06/07/1967]CHAP VII ] DISSMISSAL, REMOV AL AND SUSPENSION [ RULES 56B-57
               Government Decision
             *The term ‘Pension’ used in Note 6 does not include death-cum-retirement
gratuity.
                Effective from 22nd August 1960.
               Ruling No. 1
                **Notwithstanding the provision contained in clause (4), an officer who
is reinstated under clause (1) and who would have been eligible forpromotion to a higher post during the period of suspension but for thesuspension will be entitled to the pay and allowances of the higher postonly from the date on which he assumes charge of that post.
               Ruling No. 2
           # It is not necessary to create an additional post to draw the pay and
allowances of an officer who has been placed under suspension and is
reinstated in service, treating the period of absence as duty.
57.          †An officer who is detained in custody, whether on a criminal charge, or
otherwise, for a period exceeding forty-eight hours, or is undergoingimprisonment, shall be deemed to be under suspension with effect fromthe date of commencement of the detention or imprisonment, as the casemay be, and shall not be allowed to draw any pay and allowances duringsuch period of suspension other than any subsistence allowance andother allowances that may be granted in accordance with Rule 55, untilhe is reinstated in service.  An adjustment of his pay and allowances forsuch periods should thereafter be made according to the circumstances
105CHAP VII ] [ RULES 57-59 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
of the case, the full amount being given only in the event of the officer
being acquitted of blame or (if the proceedings taken against him werefor his arrest for debt) of its being provided that the officer’s liabilityarose from circumstances beyond his control.
58.           *An officer against whom a criminal charge or a proceeding for arrest for debt
is pending in a court of law should also be placed under suspension by the
issue of specific orders to this effect during periods when he is  not actuallydetained in custody or imprisoned (e.g., whilst released on bail) if the charge
made or proceeding taken against him is connected with his position as an
officer or is likely to embarrass him in the discharge of his duties as such orinvolves moral turpitude unless there are exceptional reasons for not adopting
this course.  In regard to his pay and allowances the provisions of the rule
above shall apply.
59.         Leave may not be granted to an officer under suspension.
* [G O(P) No. 266/1967/Fin., Dated 06/07/1967]
106#[Substitution G O(P) No. 183/2012/Fin., Dated 26/03/2012 (with effect from 26/03/2012)]
**[G O(P) No. 457/1995/Fin., Dated  28/07/1995]
*[Insertion G O(P) No. 213/2005/Fin., Dated 11/05/2005]CHAP VIII ] [ RULE 60
CHAPTER  VIII
COMPULSORY  RETIREMENT
60.  (a)    #Except as otherwise provided in these rules the date of compulsory retirement
of an officer shall take effect from the afternoon of the last day of the monthin which he attains the age of 56 years.  He may be retained after this dateonly with the sanction of the Government on public grounds which must berecorded in writing, but he must not be retained after the age of 60 yearsexcept in very special circumstances.
 **(a a)    An Officer in the Kerala Judicial Service or the Kerala State Higher Judicial
Service shall ordinarily retire when he attains the age of 60 years; but heshall have the option to retire when he attains the age of 58 years.  Hiscontinuance in service beyond the age of 58 years shall however be subjectto review by the High Court as per the provisions of the Kerala JudicialService Rules and the Kerala State Higher Judicial Service Rules.
              This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with  effect from
31
st December , 1992.
     (a b)    *A person appointed as Industrial Tribunal shall retire  on superannuation at
the age of 60 years.
               This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 1st  July,
1995.
  †(ac)    A person appointed as Vigilance Tribunal under the Kerala Civil Services
(Vigilance Tribunal) Rules, 1960 shall retire on superannuation at the ageof 60 years.
              *This shall be deemed to have come into force on the 9
th day of March, 2005.COMPULSORY RETIREMENT
†[Insertion G O(P) No.77/2008/Fin., Dated 11/02/2008 (with effect from 09/03/2005)]
107CHAP VIII ] [ RULE 60 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
# (ad)   Doctors in the Medical category under the Medical Education Service and
the Dental Colleges and Dental Wings in the Medical Colleges and theteaching staff, including Principals of the Ayurveda Colleges andHomoeopathic Medical Colleges shall retire on the afternoon of the last dayof the month in which they attain the age of 60 years:
           Provided that this provision shall not be applicable to the faculties in
Nursing, Pharmacy and non-medical category under the MedicalEducation Service.
          This sub-rule shall be deemed to have come into force in the case of the
Doctors in the medical category under the Medical Education Service on the1
st day of May, 2009, in the case of the Doctors working in the Dental Colleges
and the Dental Wings in the Medical Colleges, on the 30th day of March,
2012, in the case of the teaching staff of the Ayurveda Colleges on the 7th
day of April, 2012 and in the case of the teaching staff of the HomoeopathicMedical Colleges on the 9
th day of April, 2012.
   (ae)  The categories of teaching staff including Principals mentioned in the
sub-rule(ad) who complete the age of 60 years during the course of anacademic year shall continue in service till the last day of the month inwhich the academic year ends; but the extended period of service shallnot be reckoned for any service benefits such as increment, higher grade,accrual of leave, promotion and pay revision effective from a date afterthe date of superannuation under sub-rule(ad). The period shall not becounted as qualifying service for pension and the pay received duringthe period shall not be reckoned for computing average emoluments orpensionary benefits or commuted value of pension. If they are on leaveon the day they attain the age of 60 years and fail to rejoin duty on thefirst working day immediately after the date of superannuation, they
# [Insertion G O(P) No.01/2013/Fin., Dated  01/01/2013 (with effect from 01/01/2013)]
108CHAP VIII ] COMPULSORY RETIREMENT [ RULE 60
shall be retired with effect from the date of superannuation under sub-
rule (ad). But, in cases where officers coming under this rule are under
suspension on the date of superannuation or thereafter, but before theclosing day of the academic year, they shall be retired from service on
the date of supernnuation or on the date of suspension, whichever is
later.
          If, the day on which the categories of teaching staff including Principals
mentioned in the sub-rule (ad) attain the age 60 years falls within the period
of one month beginning with the day of reopening of the institutions, theyshall cease to be on duty with effect from the date of such reopening and
they shall be granted additional leave from the date of reopening to the last
day of the month in which they attain the age of 60 years. They shall beentitled to the benefit of increment if it falls due before the actual date on
which they attain the age of 60 years.
           The additional leave granted under this sub-rule shall not be counted
against the eligible leave but shall be counted for pension. During theperiod of leave they may draw leave allowance at the same rate as the
pay and allowances they would have drawn if they were on duty;
   Note 1 .- Even in cases where it is found absolutely necessary to retain
the service of a teaching staff specified in sub-rule (ad), who hasattained the age of 60 years, as far as possible only re-employment
after retirement shall be resorted to, which shall not ordinarily be
sanctioned for more than one year at a time.
   Note 2 .- Completion of 60 years of age in service shall be in the afternoon and
not in the forenoon. If the date of birth of a person is the first day of July,
he completes his 60
th year on the 30th day of June, and that date (30th
June) is the last day of the month in which he completes the 60th
year. If on the first day of July he is on his 61st year and that day is
a non-working day for him, he shall cease to be in service on and
from the 1st day of July.
109CHAP VIII ] [ RULE 60 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
   Note 3 .- A teaching staff specified in sub-rule (ad) whose date of birth is
the first day of July and who attains the age of 60 years shall not beallowed to continue in service till the end of the academic year.
    *(af)   The date of compulsory retirement of an officer appointed on or after the 1
st
day of April, 2013 and who is a member of National Pension System shall
take effect from the afternoon of the last day of the month in which he attainsthe age of 60 years. He may be retained after this date only with the sanctionof the Government on public grounds which must be recorded in writing, buthe must not be retained after the age of 64 years except in very specialcircumstances.
                The teaching staff of all educational institutions (including Principals of
Colleges) who complete the age of 60 years during the course of an academicyear shall continue in service till the last day of the month in which theacademic year ends, but the extended period of service shall not be reckonedfor any service benefits such as increment, higher grade, accrual of leave,promotion and pay revision effective from a date after the date ofsuperannuation. If they are on leave on the day they attain the age of 60 yearsand fail to rejoin duty on the first working day immediately after the date ofsuperannution, they shall be retired with effect from the date of superannution.But, in cases where officers coming under this rule are under suspension onthe date of superannuation or thereafter,  but before the closing day of theacademic year, they shall be retired from service on the date ofsuperannuation or on the date of suspension, whichever is later.
           If, however, the day on which teaching staff, (including Principals of
Colleges) attain the age of 60 years falls within the period of one monthbeginning with the day of reopening of the institutions, they shall ceaseto be on duty with effect from the date of such, reopening and they shallbe granted additional leave from the date of reopening to the last day of
* [Inserted  G O(P) No. 469/2014/Fin., Dated 31/10/2014 (with effect from 01/04/2013)]
110CHAP VIII ] COMPULSORY RETIREMENT [ RULE 60
the month in which they attain the age of 60 years. They shall be entitled
to the benefit of increment if it falls due before the actual date on whichthey attain the age of 60 years.
              If they are eligible to continue in service till the close of the academic year
under the 2
nd paragraph of this sub-rule, they shall be granted additional
leave from the date of closing for vacation till the last day of the month, whenthe date of closing is earlier than the last day of the month.
                  The additional leave granted under this sub-rule will not be counted against
the eligible leave. During the period of leave they will draw leave allowance atthe same rate as the pay and allowances they would have drawn if they wereon duty.
   Explanation :- For the purpose of this sub-rules, ‘the teaching staff’ means
those employees included in the Explanation to sub-rule (c).
  Note 1 .- Even in cases where it is found absolutely necessary to retain the
service of an officer who has attained the age of 60 years as far aspossible only re-employment after retirement shall be resorted to whichshall not ordinarily be sanctioned for more than one year at a time.
   Note 2 .- Completion of 60 years of age in service shall be in the afternoon
and not in the forenoon. A person whose date of birth is first day ofJuly completes his 60
th years on 30th day of June, and that date (30th
June) is the last day of the  month in which he completes the 60th year.
          If on first day of July he is on his 61st year and that day is a non-
working day for him. He shall cease to be in service on and from the1
st day of July.
Note 3 .- A teaching staff whose date of birth is first day of July and who attains
the age of 60 years shall not be allowed to continue in service till theend of the academic year.
111CHAP VIII ] [ RULE 60 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
   Note 4 .- In cases where the academic year in respect of the institutions under
the Director of Public Instrucion is extended beyond the 31st of March
in any year, the teaching staff of such institutions who are allowed tocontinue in service beyond the date of superannuation under the secondpara of sub-rule (af) shall retire on the last day of March itself.
        (b) 
   †Officers in the Last Grade Service on 7th April 1970 will retire on the afternoon
of  the last day of the month in which they attain the age of 60 years providedthat this benefit will be available to them only as long as they continue to bein the Last Grade Service as defined in Rule 12 (16-A).
   # Note 1 .- Ex-servicemen who were in armed force prior to 7
th April, 1970 and
who have been appointed as Last Grade Employees in the Last GradeService in the State after 7
th April 1970 will also be eligible for the
benefit of the above rule provided they continue to be in the LastGrade Service.
   **Note 2 .-The patient employees appointed as Hospital attendant Grade II
in the Leprosy Hospitals under Health Services Department will alsobe eligible for the benefit of the above rule irrespective of the date ofappointment.
         This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f.23
rd
August, 1984.
     (c)   ! The teaching staff of all Educational Institutions (including Principals of
Colleges) who complete the age of 56 years during the course of an academicyear shall continue in service till the last day of the month in which theacademic year ends; but the extended period of service shall not be reckoned
! [Substitution G O(P) No.183/2012/Fin., Dated 26/03/2012 (with effect from 26/03/2012)]† [G O(P) No. 344/1975/Fin., Dated 31/07/1975]
# [G O(P) No.535/1990/Fin., Dated  25/10/1990]
**[Insertion G O(P) No. 159/2002/Fin., Dated 22/03/2002]
112CHAP VIII ] COMPULSORY RETIREMENT [ RULE 60
for any service benefits such as increment, higher grade, accrual of leave,
promotion and pay revision effective from a date after the date ofsuperannuation under sub-rule (a) of rule 60.  The period shall not be countedas qualifying service for pension and the pay received during the period shallnot be reckoned for computing average emoluments or pensionary benefitsor commuted value of pension.  If they are on leave on the day they attain theage of 56 years and fail to rejoin duty on the first working day immediatelyafter the date of superannuation, they shall be retired with effect from thedate of superannuation under sub-rule (a) of rule 60.  But, in cases whereofficers coming under this rule are under suspension on the date ofsuperannuation or thereafter, but before the closing day of the academic year,they shall be retired from service on the date of superannuation or on the dateof suspension, whichever is later.
                If, however, the day on which the teaching staff (including Principals of
Colleges) attain the age of 56 years falls within the period of one monthbeginning with the day of reopening of the institutions, they shall ceaseto be on duty with effect from the date of such reopening and they shallbe granted additional leave from the date of reopening to the last day ofthe month in which they attain the age of 56 years.  They shall be entitledto the benefit of increment if it falls due before the actual date on whichthey attain the age of 56 years.
              If they are eligible to continue in service till the close of the academic year
under the 1
st paragraph of this sub-rule, they shall be granted additional
leave from the date of closing for vacation till the last day of the month whenthe date of closing is earlier than the last day of the month.
              The additional leave granted under this sub-rule will not be counted against
the eligible leave and will count for pension.  During the period of leave theywill draw leave allowance at the same rate as the pay and allowances theywould have drawn if they were on duty.
113CHAP VIII ] [ RULE 60 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
   Explanation.-  For the purpose of this sub-rule, ‘teaching staff ’ includes-
     (1)     Assistant Educational Officers, including Deputy Inspectors of Malabar
area.
   (2)   District Educational Officers and officers belonging to the cadre, but
working in other assignment.
    (3)    The following officers of the State Institute of Education, namely :-
            (a)   Junior Evaluation Officer,
           (b)  Special Assistant in English,
           (c)   Technical Assistant,
            (d)   Text Books Research Officer,
            (e)   Education Techniques Officer,
             (f)   Junior Science Consultant,
            (g)   Instructors in Science, and
            (h)   Staff drafted from the teaching staff of Education Department,
provided the continuance of this staff in service till the closingday of schools is absolutely essential in the interest of workand that they are entitled to this benefit in their parentDepartment.
            
  † Items (1) and (2) above shall be deemed to have come into force with
effect from 9th August 1968 and item No (3) shall be deemed to have
come into force with effect from 8th May 1969.
    (4)  *(a)  Director of Collegiate Education.
                    Effective from 9th June 1971.
† [G O(P) No.344/1970/Fin., Dated 22/05/1970]
*[G O(P) No.622/1971/Fin., Dated 12/10/1971]
114[ **Insertion, ^ Substitution G O(P) No. 261/2009/Fin., Dated 04/07/2009
(with effect from 24/04/2009)]
† [G O(P) No. 264/1981/Fin., Dated  02/05/1981]
# [G O(P) No.122/1982/Fin., Dated 18/03/1982]
! [G O(P) No. 248/1973/Fin., Dated 22/06/1973]
~[G O(P) No.961/1986/Fin., Dated 30/12/1986]CHAP VIII ] COMPULSORY RETIREMENT [ RULE 60
  (b)   Additional Director of Collegiate Education.
  (c)    Deputy Director of Collegiate Education.
    **Note 1 .- The extended period of service under sub-rule (c) shall be
reckoned for all service benefits such as increment, pension, higher
grade, accrual of leave, promotion and pay revision .
    ^ Note 2 .- † Item (b) shall be deemed to have been added with effect from
the 26th November 1980 and item (c) shall be deemed to have been
added with effect from 21st August 1974.
  (d)   Assistant Director of Collegiate Education.
  (e)   Special Officer (University Grants Commission Schemes)
      # Note 3 .-The items (d) and (e) shall be deemed to have come into force
with effect from the 8th July 1981.
       !(5)    Special Officer for Direct Payment in the Department of Collegiate  Education.
              This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 11th
December 1972.
      ~(6)   The following Officers appointed from the teaching department of the Medical
College Service, namely :-
   (a)   Director of Medical Education, and
   (b)   Joint Director of Medical Education
   This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with  effect from
29th August, 1984.
115CHAP VIII ] [ RULE 60 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
      (7)   *The following officers appointed from the Teaching  Staff of  the Technical
Education Department:-
    (a)   Director of Technical Education.
    (b)   Joint Director of Technical Education.
    (c)   Professor (Direct payment).
    (d)  Deputy Director of Technical Education.
    (e)   Joint Controller of Technical Examinations.
    (f)   Training Officers.
    (g)   Technical Officer.
    (h)   Stock Verification Officer.
    (i)    Assistant Director of Technical Education.
  (j)  Special Officers appointed for starting of Technical Educational
Institutions.
 (k) Director, Kerala State Science and  Technology Museum,
Thiruvananthapuram.
    (l)     Director, Institute of Human Resource of Development for Electronics.
 (m)  Public Relations Officer, Directorate of Technical Education,
Thiruvananthapuram.
   Note .- The benefit of Rule 60 (c) part I Kerala Service Rules will be available
to the above officers only if the incumbents holding the posts descentfrom the teaching faculty.
            The items (a) to (j) above shall be deemed to have come into force on
the 2
nd day of July 1990 and items (k) to (m) shall be deemed to have
come into force on the 19th day of October 1990.
*[G O(P) No.1034/1997/Fin., Dated 12/11/1997]
116[*Deletion, **Subtitution G O(P) No. 183/2012/Fin., Dated 26/03/2012
(with effect from 26/03/2012)]CHAP VIII ] COMPULSORY RETIREMENT [ RULE 60
   Note 1 .- *Omitted
   Note 2 .- The teaching staff referred to in the above rule who are past the age
of 55 years on the 4th day of May 1967 or who attain the age of 55 years
within a period of three months from that date will continue in servicetill the closing day of the academic year 1967-68 (Notes 1 and 2 shall be
deemed to have come into force with effect from the 4
th day of May
1967).
  Note 3 .-Even in cases where it is found absolutely necessary to retain the
services of an officer who has attained the age of **56  years as far as
possible only re-employment after retirement should be resorted to,which shall not ordinarily be sanctioned for more than one year at a
time.
  Note 4 .-In the case of an officer whose year of birth is known but not the exact
month and date the first July shall be taken as the date of birth; where theyear and month are known but not the exact date, the 16
th day of the month
shall be taken as the date of birth.
  Note 5 .-Except when extension of service is specifically sanctioned the
retirement of an officer is automatic and no separate sanction isrequired.
   Note 6 .- For the purpose of this rule as well as the rules in Appendix X, in
the case of an officer who entered service prior to first January 1950and whose date of birth has been noted in  Malabar Era in theService Records, the age may be calculated in the Malabar Era.
  **Note 7  .-
 Completion of 56 years of age in service is in the afternoon and
not in the forenoon.  A person whose date of birth is first of Julycompletes his 56
th year on 30th June, and that date (30th June) is the last
117CHAP VIII ] [ RULE 60 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
day of the month in which he completes the 56th year.  On first of July
he is on his 57th year and that day is a non-working day for him.  He
shall cease to be in service on and from the 1st July.
   **Note  8 .- A teacher whose date of birth is first July and who attains the age
of 56 years shall not continue in service till the end of the academicyear.
   Note 9 .-The benefit contemplated in sub-rule (b) above will not be available
to those reverted to the Last Grade Service, other wise than for want ofvacancy.
             (This will take effect from  the date of orders).
   
†The above amendments  (Except Notes 1 to 6 and 9 above) shall be deemed
to have come into force with effect from 5th April 1974.
   !Note 10 .- In this rule the words “Last day of the month” used mean the last
day of the month in Christian Era.  In cases where the date ofsuperannuation is calculated in the Malabar Era in accordance withNote 6,  the corresponding date in the Christian Era shall be reckonedfor arriving at the last day of the month.
   This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect on and
from 5
th April 1974.
  **Note 11 .- In cases where the academic year in respect of the institutions
under the Director of Public Instruction is extended beyond the 31st of
March in any year, the teaching staff of such institutions who areallowed to continue in service beyond the date of superannuationunder sub-rule (c) shall retire on the last day of March itself.
[**Insertion, G O(P) No.183/2012/Fin., Dated 26/03/2012 with effect from 26/03/2012)]
†[G O(P) No.344/1975/Fin., Dated 31/07/1975]
! [G O(P) No. 11/1976/Fin., Dated 13/01/1976]
118**[G O(P) No. 11/1996/Fin., Dated 01/01/1996]CHAP VIII ] COMPULSORY RETIREMENT [ RULE 60
  **Note 12 .-The benefit contemplated in sub-rule (b) above will be available
to the following categories of employees also from the dates indicated
against each.
* [G O(P) No.904/1997/Fin., Dated 22/10/1997]Sl No. Category Date from which the
benefit shall bedeemed to have comeinto force.
1.(i) Full time Contingent Employees who were
appointed as provisional employees for theperiod from 1.4.1965 to 31-3-1968 and absorbedas Last Grade Employees of regularestablishment with effect from 7.4.1970.27.10.1988
(ii) Full time Contingent Employees who were
appointed as provisional employees for theperiod from 1.4.1968 to 7.4.1970 and absorbed asLast Grade Employees of regular establishment
with effect from  7.4.197029.11.1989
2 Villagemen who were in service on 7.4.1970 and
who are continuing as such11.3.1976
3 Ex-Servicemen who had been  in  Armed Forces
prior to 7-4-1970 and appointed as Village men inthe State Service after 7.4.1970 and continuingas such.1.1.1992TABLE
Ex-Assam Rifles personnel who were in Assam
Rifles prior to 7
th April, 1970 and who have been
appointed as Last Grade Employees in the LastGrade Service in the State Service after  the 7
th
April, 1970 and continuing as such*4 19.9.1995
119CHAP VIII ] [ RULE 60-60A KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
**5 Ex-CRPF personnel who were in CRPF prior to  7th
April , 1970 and who have been appointed as Last
Grade Employees in the service of  the State after
7th April 1970 and continuing as such.29-5-2000
**6 Ex-BSF  personnel who were in BSF  prior to 7th
April, 1970 and who have been appointed as Last
Grade Employees in the service of the State after7
th April 1970 and continuing as such.24-7-2001
They shall come into force at once.
              Ruling No. 1
             The term “educational institution” mentioned in the above rule will include
besides the institutions coming under the Education Department, Institutions
such as Medical Colleges, Agricultural Colleges, Veterinary Colleges,
Engineering Colleges, Law Colleges, Training Colleges, Polytechnics,Industrial Schools, Fisheries Schools and such other Educational Institutions
which have regular authorised vacations.
             
  Ruling No. 2
                *The teaching staff of educational institutions who are allowed to continue
in service beyond the  date of superannuation till the end of the academic
year will not be eligible for any leave other than casual leave during theperiod of their service beyond the date of superannuation and if they apply
for any leave other than casual leave during the period, they shall be retired
from service from the date of such application for leave .
60A.      
 †[Deleted]
                Effective from 3rd February, 1988
*[G O(P) No.296/1972/Fin., Dated 18/07/1972]**[Insertion G O(P) No.214/2005/Fin., Dated 11/05/2005]
†[G O(P) No.549/1988/Fin., Dated 31/08/1988]
120CHAP IX ] [ RULE 61-62
CHAPTER  IX
LEA VE
SECTION   1
 EXTENT OF APPLICATION
61.           Unless in any case it be otherwise distinctly provided, the rules in this Chapter
apply to all officers to whom these service rules as a whole apply.
62. (1)  Unless in any case it be otherwise distinctly provided by or under these
rules, an officer transferred to a service or post to which these rulesapply, from a service or post to which they do not apply, is not ordinarilyentitled  to leave under these rules in respect of duty performed beforesuch transfer:
                Provided that in the case of an officer who holds a substantive, officiating or
temporary post on the day previous to the one on which these rules comeinto force, the maximum limit of accumulation of earned leave specified inRule 78 shall not apply during the period of the  first five years from the dateof his appointment to the service or from that of the commencement of theserules whichever is later and such an officer may be allowed during the saidperiod of five years to avail himself of the accumulated leave to his credit:
            Provided further that on the expiry of the said period of five years the
leave at the credit of the officer in excess of the normal maximum limit ofaccumulation of leave laid down in Rule 78 shall lapse:
          Provided also that he shall not earn leave during that period unless the
accumulated leave at his credit falls below 180 days.
       (2)   Subject to the provisions contained in Rule 77(vi), the half pay leave to
be carried forward will be the balance of furlough leave or leave on halfaverage pay for which an officer is eligible on the date on which theserules come into force diminished by the leave on medical certificate takenbefore such date, under the old rules governing him.LEA VE
121CHAP VIII ] [ RULES 63-64 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
63.   (a)   If an officer, who quits the public service on compensation or invalid pension
or gratuity, is re-employed and if his gratuity is thereupon refunded or hispension held wholly in abeyance, his past service thereby becoming
pensionable on ultimate retirement, he may, at the discretion of the Government
and to such extent as the Government may decide, count his former servicetowards leave.
      (b)  An officer who is dismissed or removed from the public service, but is
reinstated on appeal or revision, is entitled to count his former service
for leave.
   Note 1 .- The re-employment of a person who has retired on a superannuation
or retiring pension is generally an exceptional and temporary expedient.
In such cases, the service of the re-employed pensioner should be
regarded as temporary and his leave during the period of re-employmentregulated by the rules in Appendix VIII.
   Note 2 .- Resignation of public service even though it is followed immediately
by re-employment entails forfeiture of past service and constitutes an
interruption of duty.  But resignation to take up another appointment
does not constitute an interruption.
S
ECTION   II
GENERAL CONDITIONS
64.         The Government may issue orders specifying the authority by whom leave
other than *leave without allowances exceeding a period of four months ata time, may be granted.
               **Effective from 6
th March 1968.
             !The power to sanction leave without allowances exceeding a period of
four months at a time will rest with Government.
*[Deletion G O(P) No.65/2007/Fin., Dated 19/02/2007]
** [G O(P) No. 481/1970/Fin., Dated. 06/07/1970]
! [G O(P) No.313/1976/Fin., Dated 05/10/1976]
122CHAP IX ] LEA VE [ RULES 64-66
             This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from
14th November 1966.
65.        Leave cannot be claimed as a matter of right.  When the exigencies of the
public service so require, discretion to refuse or revoke leave of anydescription is reserved to the authority empowered to grant it.
   Note .- The nature of the leave due and applied for by an officer cannot be
altered at the option of the sanctioning authority and while  it is opento the sanctioning authority to refuse or revoke the leave due and
applied for, it is not open to him to alter the nature of such leave.
66.         Leave ordinarily begins on the day on which transfer of charge is effected
and ends on the day preceding that on which charge is resumed.  When
the day immediately preceding the day on which an officer’s leave begins
or immediately following the day on which his leave expires is a holidayor one of a series of holidays, the officer may leave his station at the
close of the day before, or return to it on the day following such holiday
or series of holidays; provided that-
                (a)    his transfer or assumption of charge does not involve the handing or
taking over of securities or of money other than a permanent advance;
                  (b)    his early departure does not entail a correspondingly early transfer
from another station of an officer to perform his duties; and
                (c)   the delay in his return does not involve a corresponding delay in the
transfer to another station of the officer who was performing his dutiesduring his absence or in the discharge from Government service of a
person temporarily appointed to it.
             
 Ruling
                  *A restricted holiday enjoyed with the permission of the competent authority
shall be treated as holiday for the purpose of this rule.
*[G O(P) No.458/1966/Fin., Dated 13/10/1966]
123CHAP IX ] [ RULES 67-68 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
67.          On condition that the departing officer remains responsible for the money in
his charge, a competent authority may declare that proviso (a) under Rule 6 is
not applicable to any particular case.
68.         Unless the competent authority in any case otherwise directs-
               (a)    if holidays are prefixed to leave, the leave and any consequent re-
arrangement of pay and allowances takes effect from the first day
after holidays; and
                   (b)      if holidays are affixed to leave, the leave is treated as having terminated
on, and any consequent re-arrangement of pay and allowances takes
effect from, the day on which the leave would have ended, if holidayshad not been affixed.
              The following procedure is prescribed when vacation or gazetted holidays
are permitted to be prefixed or affixed to leave :-
  *Note  1.-(i)   When they are prefixed to leave, the officer proceeding on leave
will report before leaving the station, or if for urgent reasons the leave
is granted during vacation or gazetted holidays, as soon as it is grantedthat he will cease to discharge the duties of his post with effect from the
end of vacation or holidays.  The relieving officer will then assume the
duties of the post at the end of the vacation or holidays in the ordinarycourse.
  (ii)    When a vacation or holidays are affixed to leave, the officiating officer
will be relieved in the ordinary way before the vacation, or holidays,and the officer on leave will return at the end of the vacation or holidays,
but will be regarded as having assumed the duties of the post with
effect from the commencement of the vacation or holidays.
  (iii)    Except in cases covered by (i) and (ii) above, transfer of charge
certificates should be signed by both  the relieved and relieving
*[G O(P) No. 482/1982/Fin., Dated  26/08/1982]
124CHAP IX ] LEA VE [ RULE 68
officers on the day on which charge is transferred.
  *Note 2 .- (i) When a Government Servant is certified medically unfit to attend
office,  holiday(s)  if any immediately preceding the day he is so certifiedshall be allowed automatically to be prefixed to leave and the holiday(s)if any immediately succeeding  the day he is so certified (including thatday) shall be treated as part of the leave; and
  (ii)    When a Government Servant is certified medically fit for joining duty,
holiday(s) if any, succeeding the day he is so certified (including thatday) shall automatically be allowed to be suffixed to the leave, andholiday(s) if any, preceding the day he is so certified shall be treated aspart of the leave.
 (iii)   Except in cases covered by (i) and (ii) above, transfer of charge
certificates should be signed by both the relieved and relievingofficers on the day on which charge is transferred.
           The note shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from
26
th  August 1982.
               Ruling No. 1
          **A restricted holiday enjoyed with the permission of the competent
authority shall be treated as holiday for the purpose of this rule.
               Ruling No. 2
                  !There is no objection to an officer in a vacation Department being  permitted
to suffix holiday (s) to leave and also to enjoy the vacation in continuation ofthe holiday so suffixed to leave.
*[G O(P) No. 482/1982/Fin., Dated  26/08/1982]
**[G O(P) No. 458/1966/Fin., Dated 13/10/1966]
! [G O(P) No. 109/1981/Fin., Dated 09/02/1981]
125CHAP IX ] [ RULES 69-71 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
69.       An officer on leave may not take any service or accept any employment
without obtaining the previous sanction of the authority empowered to fillup the post held by him.
   Note .-  This rule does not apply to casual literary work, or to service as an
examiner or similar employment; nor does it apply to acceptance offoreign service, which is governed by the rules under Chapter XI.
70.         All orders recalling an officer to duty before the expiry of his leave should
state whether the return to duty is optional or compulsory.  If the return isoptional, the officer is entitled to no concession.  But if it is compulsory heis entitled to be treated as on duty from the date on which he starts for thestation to which he is ordered, and to draw Travelling Allowance under rulesmade in this behalf for the journey, but to draw until he joins his post, leavesalary only.
71.         No officer who has been granted leave  on medical certificate may return to
duty without first producing a medical certificate of fitness in the followingform from a Medical Officer not below the rank of an Assistant Surgeon orthe Director of Indigenous Medicine.
Signature of applicant
               
We, the members of a Medical Committee
               I, Civil Surgeon/Assistant Surgeon of
               Registered Medical  Practitioner of
               Director of Indigenous Medicine
           do hereby certify that I / we have carefully examined ABC of the ……….
Department, whose signature is given above and find that he has recoveredfrom his illness and is now fit to resume duties in Government Service.  I/wealso certify that before arriving at this decision  I / we have examined theoriginal medical  certificate(s) and statement(s) of the case (or certified copies
126CHAP IX ] LEA VE [ RULES 71-72
thereof)  on which leave was granted or extended, and have taken these into
consideration in arriving at my/our decision.
Place: …………
Date: ………….              The original medical certificate(s) and statement(s) of the case on which the
leave was originally granted or extended shall be produced before theauthority asked to issue the above certificate(s).
   Note .-  If the officer on leave is not a Gazetted Officer the authority under
which the officer will be employed on return from leave may, in itsdiscretion accept a certificate signed by any registered medicalpractitioner.  For this purpose original certificate(s) of the case shouldbe prepared in duplicate, one copy being retained by the officerconcerned.
72.(1)    An officer on leave may not return to duty before the expiry of the period
of leave granted to him, unless he is permitted to do so by the authoritywhich granted him leave.
    (2)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1) an officer on leave
preparatory to retirement shall be precluded from withdrawing his requestfor permission to retire and from returning to duty, save with the consent ofthe authority empowered to appoint him.
   Note 1 .- No formal cancellation of the unexpired portion of leave is necessary
when an officer returns to duty before the expiry of his leave.  Thecancellation will be effected by the Audit Officer in the case of GazettedOfficers and by the Head of office in the case of non- gazetted officers.
  *Note 2 .- (a) and (b) [Deleted]
* [G O(P) No. 645/1981/Fin., Dated  13/10/1981]
127CHAP IX ] [ RULES 72-73 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
               Ruling
**When the officer proceeds on leave from the post in which he is re-
employed and avails of the refused leave during the period of re-employment
or after, the leave salary would be same as would have been admissible in the
normal course but for re-employment reduced by the amount of pensionand/or pension equivalent of gratuity and other retirement benefits.
               Government Decision
               
† Initial pay on re-employment should be fixed at the minimum stage of the
time-scale of pay prescribed for the post in which an individual is employed.
In cases where it is felt that the fixation of initial pay of the re-employed
officer at the minimum of the time-scale will cause undue hardship, the paymay be fixed at a higher stage by allowing one increment for each year of
service which the officer has rendered before retirement in a post not lower
than that in which he is re-employed subject however to the proviso to Rule119, Part III of these rules.
                Effective from 20
th June 1964.
  Note 2 .-(c) The leave salary of an officer who is permitted during leave
preparatory to retirement before attaining the age of superannuation,
or during leave under Rule 75 to take up employment under any other
Government under a private employer or employment payable from alocal fund, will also be restricted during such employment as in (b)
above.
73.         *Any kind of leave under these rules may be granted in combination with or
in continuation of any other kind of leave except leave under Appendices
* [G O(P) No. 1002/1997/Fin., Dated 06/11/1997]**[G O(P) No. 218/1968/Fin., Dated 15/05/1968]
†[G O(P) No. 426/1964/Fin., Dated 20/06/1964 &
    G O(P)No.  218/1968/Fin., Dated 15/05/1968]
128CHAP IX ] LEA VE [ RULES 73-74
XII A, XII B and XII C.  However, leave under Appendices XII A and XII C
may be granted in combination with or in continuation of the leave underAppendices  XII A and XII C.
              This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 12
th
April 1984.
              Ruling
            **The eligibility for leave is determined with reference to the eligibility on
the date on which an officer proceeds on leave.
74.          Vacation may be taken in combination with or in continuation of any kind of
leave, provided the total duration of vacation and earned leave taken together,whether the earned leave is taken in combination with or in continuation ofother leave or not, shall not exceed the amount of earned leave due andadmissible to the officer at a time under Rules 78 and 79.  The combination ofearned leave and commuted leave will be limited to 240 days. There will beno limit on the half-pay leave that can be availed of at a time on medicalcertificate or private affairs. This will apply even when such leave is takenpreparatory to retirement.
              
 Government Decision No.  1
             † It is permissible to allow a vacation to intervene between two periods of
leave.  Similarly vacation may be prefixed or suffixed to leave or both prefixedand suffixed.  The only restriction is that the total duration of vacations andearned leave together should not exceed the amount of  earned leave dueand admissible to the officer under Rules 78 and 79, Part I, Kerala ServiceRules and that the duration of the total period of vacation, earned leave andcommuted leave taken together shall not exceed 240 days.
**[G O(P) No. 309/1976/Fin., Dated 29/09/1976]
† [Circular No. 90/1963/Fin., Dated 16/12/1963]
129CHAP IX ] [ RULES 74-77 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
               Government Decision No. 2
          †Special casual leave may be combined with vacation, but in such cases
combination of special casual leave with ordinary casual leave will not bepermitted.
75.      **No leave shall be granted beyond the date on which an officer must
compulsorily retire:
             The provisos, the explanations and the Notes 1 to 7 omitted with effect
from 13
th October 1981.
76.          Any leave granted under these rules may be retrospectively commuted into
any other kind of leave admissible to the officer at the time the original leave
was granted:
             Provided that earned leave shall not be commuted into leave of a different
kind, *except as provided in the Note below Rule 1, Appendix XII C.
              *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from
12th April 1984.
               !Provided further that no commutation of leave shall be permitted on expiry
of one year from the date of sanction of leave.
SECTION   III
GRANT OF LEAVE
77.         In these rules :-
              (i)   ‘Ordinary leave’ includes earned leave, half-pay leave, commuted leave,
leave not due and leave without allowances.
! [Insertion G O(P) No. 23/2013/Fin., Dated 10/01/2013 (with effect from 10/01/2013)]*[G O(P) No. 1002/1997/Fin., Dated 06/11/1997]†[G O(P) No. 216/1976/Fin., Dated  24/07/1976]
**[G O(P) No. 645/1981/Fin., Dated 13/10/1981]
130CHAP IX ] LEA VE [ RULE 77
                   (ii)   ‘Special leave’ includes disability leave, maternity leave, *paternity
leave, †child adoption leave  and hospital leave.
                (iii)    ‘Earned leave’ means leave earned in respect of periods spent on duty.
              (iv)    ‘Half-pay leave’ means leave earned in respect of completed years of
service.
                 (v)   ‘Earned leave due’ means the amount of privilege leave/earned leave to
the credit of an officer under the rules previously in force on the dayimmediately preceding the date on which these rules came into forceplus the earned leave calculated as prescribed in these rules diminishedby the amount of earned leave taken after the date on which these rulescame into force.
                 (vi)    ‘Half-pay leave due’ means the amount of half-pay leave calculated
as prescribed in Rule 83 for the entire service diminished by theamount of leave on private affairs and leave on medical certificatetaken before these rules came into force and half-pay leave takenon or after the date:
              Provided that in the case of officers who are given credit for the half-pay leave
admissible to them as on the date of coming into force of these rules in accordancewith the provision contained in Rule 62 (2), the half-pay leave according to theserules will be calculated only on the service rendered from the date on whichthese rules come into force:
               Provided also that where such leave on private affairs and leave on medical
certificate already  availed of is in excess of the period of half-pay leave due,reckoned under this rule as on the date on which these rules come into force,such excess shall be wiped off,
*[Insertion G O(P) No. 27/2013/Fin., Dated 15/01/2013  (with effect from 26/02/2011)]
†[Insertion G O(P) No. 76/2010/Fin., Dated 18/02/2010 (with effect from 31/08/2007)]
131CHAP IX ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
              (vii)    ‘Commuted leave’ means leave taken under Rule 84.
             (viii)      ‘Officer in permanent employ’ means an officer who holds substantively
a permanent post or who holds a lien on a permanent post or who wouldhold a lien on a permanent post had the lien not been suspended.
                 (ix)    ‘Completed  years of service’ and ‘one year’s continuous service’ mean
continuous service of the specified duration under the Government ofKerala and include periods spent on duty as well as on leave includingleave without allowances.
              Ruling
                *The period of leave without allowances availed of under Appendix XIIA for
taking up employment will be excluded in reckoning completed years of servicefor purposes of calculating half-pay leave to be earned under Rule 83 Part IKerala Service Rules.
               Government Decision No.1
               ** Under Article 195, Travancore Service Regulations and Article 130 (4) of
the old leave Rules in the Cochin Service Regulations, privilege leave on halfsalary can be granted in case of urgent necessity to an officer serving in avacation department who enjoys the benefit of vacation.  As the privilegeleave is not earned but only granted in cases of urgent necessity, neithercredit towards leave on this account need be made in the leave account ofthe officer as on 1
st November 1959 under Kerala Service Rules for such
leave already availed of prior to 1st November 1959 reduced from the half-pay
leave admissible under Rule 77 (vi), Kerala Service Rules.
              Furlough on average salary taken prior to 1st November  1959 is to be reduced
from the half-pay leave by twice the amount of such leave for purposes of Rule
77 (vi) Kerala Service Rules.
*[G O(P) No. 1171/1987/Fin., Dated 30/12/1987]
** [Circular. No. 17422/1960/Fin., Dated 30/03/1960][ RULE 77
132†[G O(Ms) No. 477/1960/Fin., Dated 11/10/1960]CHAP IX ] LEA VE [ RULES 77-79
               Government Decision No.2
          † According to G.O.(Ms) 101, dated 22nd January 1958 of the Madras
Government, the benefit of Rule 27 of the Madras Leave Rules, 1933 tocertain approved probationers stand extended upto 31
st December 1962.  In
the case of those officers allotted from Madras, governed by Madras LeaveRules and who were eligible for the above concession and who have optedto be governed by the Kerala Service Rules from 1
st November 1959,  the
accrued leave reckoned on the basis of the concession but not availed of bythem on 1
st November 1959 will be treated as leave standing to their credit for
purposes of Rule 77 (v) Kerala Service Rules.
78.           The earned leave admissible to an officer in permanent employ is one-eleventh
of the period  spent on duty,  provided that he will cease to earn  such leavewhen the earned leave due amounts *300 days.
               *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1
st
November, 1998.
79.         Subject to the Provisions of Rules 65 and 75 the maximum earned leave
that may be granted at a time to an officer shall be # 180 days.
              # This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st
November,1998.
  Exception.-  In the case of an officer applying for leave preparatory to
retirement, the maximum earned leave that may  be granted at a timeshall be *300 days.
  
 *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from
1st November, 1998.
*[G O(P) No. 130/2002/Fin., Dated 13/03/2002]
# [G O(P) No. 908/1997/Fin., Dated 24/10/1997]
133CHAP IX ] [ RULES 80-81 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
80.         Earned leave is not admissible to an officer in permanent employ serving  in
a vacation department in respect of duty performed  in any year in which he
avails himself of the full vacation.
               Ruling
Officers undergoing training in institutions which have regular vacations
and who enjoy vacations of those institutions, will be treated as officers
serving in a vacation department for the purpose of Rule 80 Part I, Kerala
Service Rules.
81.        The earned leave admissible to an officer in permanent employ serving in a
vacation department, in respect of any year in which he is prevented from
availing himself of the full vacation, is such proportion of 30 days as the
number of days of vacation not taken bears to the full vacation.
             If in any year the officer does not avail himself of the vacation, earned
leave will be admissible to him in respect of that year in accordance with
the provisions of Rules 78 and 79 above.
  Note 1 .- A vacation department is a department or part of a department to
which regular vacations are allowed during which the officers serving
in the department are permitted to be absent from duty.
  Note 2 .-The Principal, the Superintendent, the entire office staff, sergeant (if
any) and the gardeners of the following institutions will be treated as
non-vacation officers with effect from the dates specified against each:
Government Arts Colleges
 Law Colleges, Training Colleges and
Physical Education Colleges
Engineering Colleges and Polytechnics
Junior Technical Schools            4.           1.
           2.
           3.  :  1.11.1959
  :  8.03.1960
  :  13.6.1960
          :  18.5.1963
134CHAP IX ] LEA VE [ RULE 81
       *The Teaching staff in the Hindi Teachers’ Training Institutes at
Trivandrum and Trichur will be treated as non-vacation officers witheffect from 4
th June 1970.
           **The headmasters of schools and non-teaching staff of the schools
under the Director of Public Instruction will be treated as non-vacationofficers with effect from the date noted against each:-
             Headmasters of schools : 9.6.1969
             Non teaching staff : 22.4.1960  Exception.-  !The Superintendents of the Junior Technical Schools attached
to the Polytechnics at Kannur, Calicut and Trichur will be treated asvacation officers.
          This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect
from 1
st April 1967.
             †The Senior Agricultural Officer/Veterinary Surgeon and Attenders in High
Schools where V ocational Higher Secondary Courses were introduced, willbe treated as non-vacation officers with effect  from 13
th August 1984.
              †The Assistant Director of Fisheries and Attenders in the High Schools
where Fisheries have been introduced  as vocational subject, will betreated as non-vacation officers with effect from 28
th May 1986.
  Note 3 .-The term “Year” should be interpreted to mean, not a calendar year in
which duty is performed,  but twelve months of actual duty in a vacationdepartment.
*[G O(P) No. 205/1972/Fin., Dated 16/06/1972]
**[G O(P) No. 39/1973/Fin., Dated  05/02/1973]
! [G O(P) No. 78/1970/Fin., Dated 29/01/1970]
»[G O(P) No. 95/1989/Fin., Dated 24/02/1989]
135CHAP IX ] [ RULE 81 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
   Note 4 .-  When an officer is transferred from a vacation department to a non-
vacation department, his period of service in the former will, for thepurpose of calculation of leave, be considered to have terminated witheffect from the close of the last vacation enjoyed by him. * [But if thetransfer is effected during the course of vacation, he will be deemed tohave been transferred to the non-vacation department on the close ofthe vacation which he has partly enjoyed and he will be credited withproportionate amount of earned leave under this rule for the period ofvacation which he was prevented from enjoying on account of suchtransfer].  When an officer is transferred from a non-vacation to avacation department,  his period of service in the latter will be held tohave commenced from the  date of expiry of the last vacation previousto such transfer.
            * This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect
from 6
th August 1982.
               Government Decision
             † The above Note shall apply to appointments of Government Officers in a
vacation Department through the Public Service Commission while workingin non-vacation Department in the course of the academic year and viceversa.
  # Note 5 .- The Library staff of Arts and Science, Training and Law Colleges
shall be treated as non-vacation staff.
          This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect
from 7
th November 1974.
*[G O(P) No. 409/1982/Fin., Dated 06/08/1982]
†[G O(P) No. 573/1981/Fin., Dated 02/09/1981]
# [G O(P) No. 553/1975/Fin., Dated 11/12/1975]
136CHAP IX ] LEA VE [ RULE 81
  *Note 6 .- The Heads of Nursery Schools shall be treated as non-vacation
staff.
This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect
from 11th February 1976.
  Note 7 .- In the case of an officer of non-vacation department sent on
deputation for training to an institution having regular vacation,  his
eligibility for earned leave shall be decided as follows:-
               (i)    if the officer is not permitted to enjoy the vacation and is retained
by the institution for duty, and if the head of the institution so
certifies,  the officer shall be considered as on duty during that
period and earned leave for that period shall be admissible to himin accordance with the provisions of Rules 78 and 79.
          ! (ii)   if the officer enjoys only part of the vacation, deduction of earned
leave will be in such proportion of 30 days as the number of days of
vacation enjoyed bears to the full vacation.
                 Effective  from 1
st July 1975.
              Ruling No. 1
              †An officer serving in a vacation department when put in full additional
charge of the duties of a post in a non-vacation department shall beconsidered to have been denied the benefit of vacation if that charge
arrangement falls within a vacation period.
              Ruling No. 2
         
      †Teachers deputed for training under the Summer School Training Programme
during vacation shall be considered to have been prevented from availing
*[G O(P) No. 230/1976/Fin., Dated 03/08/1976]
 ! [G O(P) No. 887/1980/Fin., Dated 21/11/1980]
†[G O(P) No. 366/1970/Fin., Dated 27/05/1970]
137CHAP IX ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
themselves of the vacation provided such period of training has been
treated as duty under Rule 12 (7).
               Ruling No. 3
               *Teaching staff who are N.C.C. Officers in Colleges, Polytechnics and Schools,
when detailed to undergo training or refresher course or for duty in connection
with the conduct of N.C.C. training or refresher course, during periods of vacation,will be treated as on duty and allowed the benefit of earned leave under the
above rule.
            The ruling shall be deemed to have come into force from 15
th February
1972.
               Ruling No. 4
              † Teaching Staff attending the work of Valuation and Tabulation of S.S.L.C.
and Higher Secondary Public Examination during vacation shall be considered
to have been prevented from availing themselves of the vacation and such
period will be treated as duty and allowed the benefit of earned leave under
the rule.
81.A      # The earned leave admissible to an officer in permanent employ in the
vacation department, who is prevented from availing himself of vacation
in full and whose actual period of duty is less than one year due to
superannuation, shall be calculated in such proportion for full block yearas the number of days of actual duty bears to the full year. The amount of
earned leave admissible shall be worked out under the formula given
below,-
               
Number of days of vacation duty    x 30 x    Days of actual duty
             Full vacation                                     365/366
*[G O(P) No. 364/1972/Fin., Dated  16/08/1972]
†[G O(P) No. 3113/1998/Fin., Dated 15/12/1998]
# [Insertion G O(P) No. 75/2010/Fin., Dated 18/02/2010 (with effect from 18/02/2010)][ RULES 81-81A
13882.          Half-pay leave .- Half-pay leave as provided in Rule 83 may be availed of
on private affairs or on medical certificate.
83.          The half-pay leave admissible to an officer in permanent employ in respect of
each completed year of service is 20 days.
84.       †Commuted Leave .- Commuted leave not exceeding half the amount of
half-pay leave due may be granted  to an officer in permanent employ.When Commuted Leave is granted twice the amount of such leave shallbe debited against the half-pay leave due.
              Ruling No. 1
             
 # [Deleted]
              Ruling No. 2
              # [Deleted]
85.           Leave not due .- Save in the case of leave preparatory to retirement leave not due
may be granted to an officer in permanent employ for a period not exceeding 360days during his entire service out of which not more than 90 days at a time and180 days in all may be otherwise than on medical certificate.  This will be debitedagainst half-pay leave which the officer earns subsequently.  Leave not dueshould be granted *[only when no other leave with allowance is available atcredit of the officer and if the authority empowered to sanction leave] is satisfiedthat there is a reasonable prospect of the officer returning to duty on the expiryof the leave and earning an equal amount of half pay leave thereafter.
   Note 1 .- Where a Government servant who has been granted leave not due
under this rule, applies for permission to retire voluntarily, the leavenot due shall, if the permission is granted, be cancelled.
 †[G O(P) No. 540/1987/Fin., Dated  20/06/1987]
# [G O(P) No. 685/1987/Fin., Dated 19/08/1987]
* [G O(P) No. 409/1977/Fin., Dated  24/10/1977]CHAP IX ] LEA VE [ RULES 82-85
139   Note 2 .- Except as provided in Note 1, leave not due when granted should in
all cases (subject to the officer’s wishes) be allowed to stand, includingcases in which the officer fails to earn it by subsequent duty.
              Government Decision
               *A question has been raised whether in cases where the officers whose credit in
half-pay leave account results in a minus balance on 1
st November 1959 can be
granted a further period of 360 days leave not due under Rule 85, Part I, KeralaService Rules. This has been examined by Government and they consider that inview of the second proviso to the amendment to clause (vi) of Rule 77, Part I,issued in G.O.(P) 261/Fin., dated 23
rd May 1960, the half-pay leave availed of prior
to 1st November 1959 in excess of the half-pay leave reckoned under Kerala
Service Rules has been wiped off.  Therefore such officers should be treated asleaving a nil balance of half-pay leave on 1
st November 1959 and they should get
the same consideration in regard to the grant of leave not due as in the case of
those who had not enjoyed half-pay leave in excess of what is admissible under
Kerala Service Rules. The Government accordingly direct that officers whosecredit on half-pay leave account results in a ‘nil’ balance on 1
st November 1959
consequent on the wiping off of the excess half-pay leave already available shallbe eligible for a further period of 360 days, leave not due under Rule 85, Part I,Kerala Service Rules, provided they otherwise satisfy the requirements of therules.
86.       The provisions of Rules 78, 80, 81, and 83, apply also to an officer not in
permanent employ except that in respect of the first year of service theearned leave admissible is 1/22 of the period spent on duty:
              Provided that no earned leave shall be admissible to such an officer in a
vacation department in respect of the first year of his service.
* [G O(Ms) No. 524/1960/Fin., Dated  07/11/1960]CHAP IX ] [ RULES 85-86 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
140  Note 1 .-The leave of an officer appointed as a probationer (for a certain
period before confirmation of his appointment) will be regulated under
the rules prescribed for permanent officers.  If for any reason it is
proposed to terminate the services of a probationer any leave whichmay be granted to him shall not extend beyond the date on which the
probationary period as already sanctioned or extended expires, or any
earlier date on which his services are terminated by the orders of theauthority competent to appoint him.
  Note 2 .-Whenever the rate of earning leave changes, the fraction in the
earned leave accumulated at the earlier rate should be rounded off tothe nearest day i.e., fraction below half should be ignored and that of
half and more should be reckoned as a day.  *Similarly, the fraction, if
any, in the leave earned in accordance with the provisions of the firstparagraph of Rule 81 by an officer serving in a vacation department
should also be rounded off to the nearest day.
            
  Ruling
              † When a full-time teacher is appointed to a part-time post, the leave earned by
him prior to becoming part-time cannot be granted to him while holding the part-time post.  Such leave may, however, be granted when he is reappointed to a full-
time post.
@86A.      Notwithstanding anything contained in Rules 84, 86, 88 (ii) and 90, an officer
not in permanent employ who has completed three years of continuos service
shall be eligible for (i) commutted leave, (ii) earned leave and (iii) leave
*[G O(P) No. 230/1967/Fin., Dated  20/06/1967]
† [G O(P) No. 275/1965/Fin., Dated 05/07/1965]
@ [Substitution G O(P) No. 75/2007/Fin., Dated  27/02/2007]CHAP IX ] LEA VE [ RULES 86-86A
141without allowances as would be admissible to him if he had held his post
substantively.
87.          An officer not in permanent employ appointed without interruption of duty
substantively to a permanent post will be credited with the earned leavewhich would have been admissible if his previous duty had been duty as an
officer in permanent employ diminished by any earned leave already taken.
Leave is not an interruption of duty for the purpose of this rule.
88.         Leave without allowances .-
               (i)   Leave without allowances may be granted to *any officer in regular
employment in special circumstances-
            ** Provided that the leave of person appointed under rule 9(a)(i) of the
Kerala State  and Subordinate Service Rules 1958 shall  be regulated by
rules under Appendix VIII of these rules, unless he is already an officeron regular employment
 (a)   when no other leave is by rule admissible, or
 (b)   when other leave is admissible, but the officer concerned applies
in writing for the grant of leave without allowances.
               (ii)   Except in the case of an officer in permanent employ, the duration of
leave without allowances shall not exceed 3 months on any one
occasion.
                   (iii) 
   † When the period of absence of any Officer is without proper application
for leave, Government may retrospectively convert the period of absence
into leave without allowance even when any other kind of leave wasadmissible at the time of absence.
* & ** [G O(P) No. 216/2005/Fin., Dated  11/05/2005]
† [G O(P) No. 99/2002/Fin., Dated 31/01/2002]CHAP IX ] [ RULES 86A-88 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
142#[G O(P) No. 654/1995/Fin., Dated 10/10/1995,
G O(P) No. 953/1986/Fin., Dated 27/12/1986]
†,* [G O(P) No. 1002/1997/Fin., Dated  06/11/1997]
 ! [Insertion G O(P) No. 23/2013/Fin., Dated 10/01/2013 (with effect from 10/01/2013)]CHAP IX ] LEA VE [ RULES 88-89
 *Exception 1.- When  a period of suspension is retrospectively treated as
leave without allowances by the revising or appellate authority the
limitation of admissible leave without allowances to three months to
officers not in permanent employ will not apply.
   #Exception 2.- The limitation in sub-rule (ii) shall not apply to the grant of
leave without allowances regulated by the rules in †Appendices XIIA,
XIIB and XIIC.
SECTION  IV
COMMUTATION OF LEA VE WITH
RETROSPECTIVE EFFECT
89.   (i)   The authority which granted leave to an officer can commute it retrospectively
into leave of a different kind which may be admissible but the officer concerned
cannot claim it as a matter of right:
              *Provided that earned leave shall not be commuted into leave of a different
kind †except as provided in the Note below Rule 1, Appendix XIIC.
               *Effective from 22nd November 1971.
              †This shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 12th April 1984.
                ! Provided further that no commutation of leave shall be permitted on expiry
of one year from the date of sanction of leave.
      (ii)   Commutation of one kind of leave into another automatically carries with it the
drawal of arrears of leave salary or recovery of amounts overdrawn.
143CHAP IX ] [ RULE 89 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
    (iii)   Commutation of leave without allowances taken during temporary service
when no other leave was due, into earned leave on confirmation without
interruption of service, by giving retrospective effect to the benefit of Rule 87
would be irregular and not in accordance with the intention of Government.
The real intention of Rule 87 is to provide only for a retrospective recalculation
of leave at credit on the date of confirmation with a reduction on accountof the earned leave already taken.  Except for the carry-forward of therecalculated credit on confirmation, leave earned and taken should be aclosed chapter at that point and no readjustment of any leave taken isautomatically permissible as a consequence of such recalculation. Theclosed chapter may however properly be re-
opened, for instance, to
correct a miscalculation of leave earned or taken or to readjust leaveearned and taken when confirmation is ordered with retrospective effector at the discretion of the sanctioning authority to convert leave of anyone kind already taken into leave due of any other kind admissible at the
time leave was originally taken.
               Government Decision
                  When confirmation is given retrospectively with effect from a date earlier
than the date on which leave was already sanctioned, such leave can becommuted and readjusted as provided in Rule 89 (iii).  Such cases do notcome within the purview of the ruling under Rule 11.  What has changedis only the status of the officer and not the rule in force at the time theleave was sanctioned.  The position will be clear from the followingillustration:-
Illustration
                Entry in service of an officer- 1
st November 1960.
                  Date of his confirmation- 1st November 1961 (orders issued on 1st November
1962).
144* [G O(P) No. 570/1978/Fin., Dated 11/07/1978]
†[Substitution G O(P) No. 406/2013/Fin., Dated 27/08/2013 (with effect from 01/07/2009)]CHAP IX ] LEA VE [ RULES 89-90A
               ** Leave without allowances taken at any time during the period from 1st
November 1960 to 31st October 1961 cannot be retrospectively commuted
into any other kind of leave.  But leave earned and taken after 1st November
1961 can be retrospectively commuted.
90.       In addition to any leave which may be admissible to him, an officer in
temporary employ, who contracts tuberculosis and undergoes treatment ina recognised sanatorium or under a qualified T.B Specialist or a Civil Surgeon
or who is suffering from leprosy and undergoes treatment in a recognised
Leprosy institution or under a Civil Surgeon or a Specialist in Leprosy,recognised as such *or who is suffering from cancer and undergoes treatment
in a recognised Cancer Institute or under a Civil Surgeon or a Specialist in
cancer or who is suffering from mental disease and undergoes treatment ina recognised Mental Hospital or under a Civil Surgeon  or a Specialist in
mental disease may be granted leave without pay upto a maximum period of
18 months [including 3 months leave without allowances authorised underRule 88 (ii) above] on any one occasion subject to the following conditions:-
                (i)    the officer is likely to continue in service till his return to duty;
                    (ii)     the leave without allowances shall be granted subject to the production
of a certificate from the Medical Officer-in-charge of the Sanatorium orqualified T.B. Specialist or a Civil Surgeon  * or a Specialist in Leprosy,
Cancer or Mental disease as the case may be specifying the period for
which leave is recommended; and
          (iii)   the medical officer in recommending leave shall bear in mind the
provisions of Rule 115.
90A. (a)  A Government officer, whether gazetted or non gazetted, drawing a basic pay
not exceeding † ````` 22360 per mensem who is granted leave without allowances
**[G O(P) No. 204/1966/Fin., Dated  17/05/1966]
145*[G O(P) No. 570/1978/Fin., Dated 11/07/1978]**[G O(P) No. 373/1983/Fin., Dated 07/07/1983]†[Substitution G O(P) No. 406/2013/Fin., Dated 27/08/2013 (with effect from 01/07/2009)]CHAP IX ] [ RULE 90A KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
for the treatment of T.B., *Leprosy, Cancer or Mental disease may be granted
an ex-gratia allowance equal to 35 per cent of the basic pay he was drawing
immediately before the commencement of the leave, subject to a maximum of
† ````` 7826 and minimum of  † ````` 5220 per mensem.  **In respect of cases
relating to treatment of cancer and mental diseases, the Rule shall be deemed
to have come into force with effect from 11th July 1978 and in respect of other
cases, with effect form 1st July 1978.
              **This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from
1st July 1978.
               †This shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st July 2009.
        (b)   The allowance will be admissible only when the officer is not eligible for any
other leave with allowances.
        (c)   The allowance will be granted irrespective of whether the patient undergoes
treatment as an inpatient or as an outpatient under the direction of a Civil
Surgeon.
     (d)  The payment of the allowance will be made only on the production of a
certificate issued by the Medical Officer-in-charge of the Sanatorium/Hospital
or by one not below the rank of a Civil Surgeon to the effect that the patienthas been under his treatment for T.B., *Leprosy, Cancer or Mental disease
during the period for which the allowance is claimed.
        (e)   The allowance in the case of an officer in temporary employ will be limited to
a maximum period of 18 months and that in the case of a permanent employ to
a maximum period of 36 months in all during his entire service.
   Note 1 .- The concession of leave without allowance upto eighteen months
will be admissible also to an officer who for want of accommodation in
146*[G O(P) No. 570/1978/Fin., Dated 11/07/1978]
# [G O(P) No. 159/1963/Fin., Dated  02/04/1963]
†[G O(P) No. 454/1968/Fin., Dated  20/08/1968]CHAP IX ] LEA VE [ RULE 90A
any recognised Sanatorium *or Cancer Institute or Mental Hospital at
or near the place of his duty receives treatment at his residence undera recognised *Tuberculosis Specialist, Leprosy Specialist, CancerSpecialist or Mental Disease Specialist and produces a certificate signedby that specialist to the effect that he is under his treatment and that hehas reasonable chances of recovery on the expiry of the leaverecommended.
   Note 2. -The leave without allowances under this rule will be admissible only
to those officers who have been in continuous Government service fora period exceeding one year.
  Note 3 .-The lists of recognised *Tuberculosis Institutions, Leprosy
Institutions, Cancer Institutions and Mental Hospitals are given inAppendix V .
              
 Government Decision
            # Recoveries on advances such as ‘Onam Advance’, ‘Advance Pay on
transfer’, etc., need not be made from the ex-gratia allowance admissibleunder this rule.  Such recoveries may be postponed till such time as thesubordinate is fit to rejoin duty or effected from any other amountspayable to the subordinate, otherwise.
               Ruling
                
 †The payment of ex-gratia allowance in the case of leave without allowances
for treatment of T.B/Leprosy taken in continuation of other kinds of leavemay be regulated on the basis of the pay drawn by the officer immediatelybefore the commencement of the combined spell of leave.
147*[G O(P) No. 204/1976/Fin., Dated  15/07/1976]CHAP IX ] [ RULE 91 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
91.        Officers with a continuous officiating or temporary service of two years or
more, will be granted in addition to any leave which they are eligible for,
leave under this rule for obtaining superior qualifications (e.g., B.A. andB.L.), provided, however, that the two years minimum service will not be
insisted on in the case of temporary or officiating officers belonging to the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.   Such leave will not, however begiven for broken periods but will cover the entire period of the course
concerned.  In cases of failure, extension of leave will be granted to cover
the further period required for the completion of the course of study.
  *Note 1 .- [Deleted]
    Note 2 .- The term ‘superior qualifications’ occurring in the above rule denotes
only such of the qualifications as on acquisition are intended to
enhance the usefulness of the Government servant concerned as a
member of the service or will improve his prospects in the service ofwhich he is a member.
              Ruling No. 1
             The time limit imposed by Rule 88 (ii) above will not apply to leave for
securing higher qualifications granted under this rule.
               Ruling No. 2
            The term “course” occurring in the above rule denotes a course of study/
training covering a specified academic period culminating in a public
examination, the success in which will qualify the candidate for a degree/diploma/certificate or for admission to another course and includes the
training at the Pre-examination Training Centres for I.A.S and other All India
Service Examinations.
148*[Circular No. 46858/Rules-1/62/Fin., Dated 30/10/1962]
** [G O(P) No. 204/1976/Fin., Dated 15/07/1976]
† [G O(P) No. 452/1979/Fin., Dated  04/05/1979]CHAP IX ] LEA VE [ RULES 91-92
               Government Decision
                * Leave under this rule can be sanctioned by the authority competent to
sanction eligible leave and leave without allowances.  Study leave underRule 99, Part I, can be sanctioned only by Government.
91.A       **Officers with a continuous officiating or temporary service of 5 years or
more may be granted in addition to any leave to which they are eligible for,leave for undergoing Post-graduate Courses in the sphere of their dutieswhich are primarily of benefit to the State, such as Post-graduate Coursesfor teachers, Engineers and Doctors.  The leave shall be granted only withdue regard to the usefulness of the higher studies to the public service.
S
ECTION   V
LEA VE  SALARY
92.         An officer on earned leave is entitled to leave salary equal to,-
                (i)    full (duty) pay i.e., pay admissible had he been on duty during the
period of leave;
                (ii)    dearness allowance applicable to the above  duty pay; and
                (iii)    such other compensatory allowances as are admissible under the rules
during the period of leave:
             † Provided that where an officer is promoted during the period he is on
earned leave the monetary benefit of promotion shall be given only fromthe date on which he assumes charge of the post, if there is change ofduties.
                Effective from 1
st April 1973.
149* [G O(P) No. 491/1975/Fin., Dated  24/10/1975]
# [Substitution G O(P) No. 406/2013/Fin., Dated  27/08/2013]† [G O(P) No. 452/1979/Fin., Dated  04/05/1979]CHAP IX ] [ RULES 92-93 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
  * Note .- See Explanation and Notes below Rule 93.
   This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st
April 1973.
93.         An officer on half pay leave or leave not due is entitled to leave salary equal
to,-
               (i)   half of duty pay, i e., half of the pay admissible had he been on duty
during the period of leave;
                  (ii)   dearness allowance applicable to the amount admissible under clause
(i) above:
             † Provided that where an officer is promoted during the period he is on half
pay leave the monetary benefit of promotion shall be given only from the date
on which the officer assumes charge of the post, if there is change of duties.
                 Effective from 1st April 1973.
   Exception.-  A non-gazetted officer whose pay before proceeding on leave,
# does not exceed  ````` 18740 in the revised scale of pay ordered in G .O.
(P) No.85/2011/Fin., dated 26th February, 2011 shall be entitled to
dearness allowance which would have been admissible had he been
on duty, which together with the leave salary so admissible, is subject
to a minimum of sixty-five percent of the pay and dearness allowancewhile on duty.  The excess over the actual leave salary in such cases
shall be termed as special leave allowance. This shall be deemed to
have come into force with effect from 1
st July 2009.
150[** Substitution,*Omitted G O(P) No.135/2002/Fin., Dated 14/03/2002]CHAP IX ] LEA VE [ RULE 93
and
              (iii)   **Hill Tract  Allowance, House Rent Allowance and City Compensatory
Allowance admissible from time to time will be payable during periods  ofall leave with allowances, if the total period  of such leave at a time doesnot exceed 180 days or if the actual duration of the leave exceeds 180 daysfor the first 180 days of such leave.
                          **This shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 25
th July, 1995
   Explanation.- For the purpose of Rule 92 and this rule, period of duty shall be
deemed to be the period of duty in a post during which the officerwould have drawn the pay in the time-scale of that post but for hisproceeding on leave.
              In the case of officiating appointments,  a certificate of continuance in the
same post but for leave should be furnished to the Audit Officer along withthe sanction noted in the Service Book and the bill claiming the leave salary.
   Note 1 .- Special pay granted in lieu of higher time-scale of pay for additional
and/or higher responsibilities attached to a post may be drawn duringperiods of leave if the officer would have continued in that post afterthe expiry of leave. The officer who records certificate to the aboveeffect in the leave salary bill may do so only after proper verification.The special pay sanctioned for specially arduous nature of work or forwork in addition to normal duties attached to his post or chargeallowance will not be admissible during periods of leave unless theofficer discharges the work for which the special pay is sanctioned.
  *Note 2 .-  [Omitted]
   This shall be deemed to have come into force w. e.f. 25
th July, 1995
151[*, # Substitution G O(P) No. 135/2002/Fin., Dated 14/03/2003]
†[G O(P) No. 703/1964/Fin., Dated  01/10/1964]CHAP IX ] [ RULES 93-96 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
  Note 3 .-The ‘Special Allowance’ sanctioned to the Police Personnel and
corresponding categories in the Fire Force, Prison, Forest, Exciseand Vigilance Departments shall be payable during periods of all kindsof leave with allowances.  But the drawal of the allowance during periodsof leave shall be restricted to the first  # 180 days  of leave.
          This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect
from 25
th July, 1995.
*94.        An officer on commuted  leave is entitled to leave salary equal to twice the
amount of the pay admissible under clause (i) of Rule 93  and allowancesapplicable under clause (ii) and (iii) thereof to the pay so admissible.
              *This shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 25
th July, 1995.
95.         An officer on leave without allowances is not entitled to any leave salary.
SECTION   VI
OVERSTAYAL
96.         In the case of an officer governed by these leave rules who remains absent
after the end of his leave, the period of such overstayal of leave is, unlessthe leave is extended by the competent authority treated as follows:-
                      (i)    as half pay leave to the extent such leave is due, whether the overstayal
is supported by a medical certificate or not;
            
   †(ii)    leave without allowances to the extent of the period of half pay leave due
falls short of the period of overstayal.
                 The officer is not entitled to leave salary during such overstayal of leave not
covered by an extension of leave by competent authority.
152* [G O(P) No. 254/1970/Fin., Dated 27/04/1970]
! [G O(P) No. 481/1970/Fin., Dated  06/07/1970]CHAP IX ] LEA VE [ RULES 96-97
 Note  .- Wilful absence from duty after the expiry of leave will be treated as
misbehaviour for the purpose of Rule 21, Part I.
96A.      * Where a Government servant not in permanent employ fails to resume duty
on the expiry of the maximum period of leave without allowances granted tohim or where such a Government servant who is granted a lesser amount ofleave without allowances than the maximum amount admissible remains absentfrom duty for any period which together with the leave without allowancesgranted exceeds the limit upto which he could have been granted such leaveunder these rules, he shall, unless the Government, in view of the exceptionalcircumstances of the case otherwise determines, be removed from serviceafter following the procedure laid down in the Kerala Civil Services(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1960.
S
ECTION  VII
SPECIAL  DISABILITY  LEA VE
97.!(1)   Subject to the conditions hereinafter specified, special disability leave may
be granted to an officer who is disabled by injury intentionally inflicted orcaused in, or in consequence of the due performance of his official duties orin consequence of his official position.
                Effective from 6
th March 1968.
       (2)   Such leave shall not be granted unless the disability manifested itself within
three months of the occurrence to which it is attributed, and the persondisabled acted with due promptitude in bringing it to notice.  But theGovernment, if they are satisfied as to the cause of the disability, may permitleave to be granted in cases where the disability manifested itself is morethan three months after the occurrence of its cause.
153*[G O(P) No. 353/1976/Fin., Dated 19/11/1976]
† [G O(P) No. 481/1970/Fin., Dated 06/07/1970]CHAP IX ] [ RULES 97-98 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
     (3)   The period of leave granted shall be such as is certified by the medical
attendant of the officer to be necessary.  It shall not be extended except
on the certificate of the medical attendant of the officer and shall in nocase exceed 24 months.
       (4)    Such leave may be combined with leave of any other kind.
       (5)    Such leave may be granted more than once if the disability is aggravated or
reproduced in similar circumstances at a later date, but not more than 24
months of such leave shall be granted in consequence of any one disability.
        (6)    Such leave shall be counted as duty in calculating service for pension and shall
not be debited against the leave account.
       (7)    Leave salary during such leave shall be granted—
              (a)    for the first  four months of any period of such leave including a
period of such leave granted under clause (5) of this rule as under
Rule 92, and
                (b)    for the remaining period of any such leave, as under Rule 93.
      (8)   In the case of a person to whom the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923,
applies, the amount of leave salary payable under this rule shall be reducedby the amount of compensation payable under section 4 (1) (d) of the said
Act.
98.         The application of the provisions of Rule 97 may be extended to an officer
who is disabled by injury accidentally incurred in *or in consequence of the
due performance of his official duties or in consequence of his official
position, or by illness incurred in the performance of any particular dutywhich has the effect of increasing his liability to illness or injury beyond the
ordinary risk attaching to the civil post which he holds.
                †Effective from 6th March 1968.
154# [G O(P)No.  491/1975/Fin., Dated  24/10/1975]
*[Omitted G O(P) No.65/2007/Fin., Dated 19/02/2007]
![Substitution G O(P) No. 216/2012/Fin., Dated 11/04/2012]CHAP IX ] LEA VE [ RULES 98-100
               The grant of this concession is subject to the further conditions :-
             (1)   that the disability, if due to disease must be certified by the medical
attendant of the officer to be directly due to the performance  of theparticular duty;
            (2)   that, if the officer has contracted such disability during service,  it
must be, in the opinion of the Government, so exceptional in character,or in the circumstances of its occurrence as to justify such unusualtreatment as the grant of this form of a leave; and
                (3)    that the period of absence recommended by the medical attendant of the
officer may be covered in part by leave under this rule and in part byother leave, and that the amount of special disability leave granted on fullpay i.e., pay admissible had he been on duty during the period of leavemay be less than four months.
  
# Note .- Disability leave is admissible to temporary officers also.
  This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st
April 1973.
99.         *[Omitted]
SECTION  IX
MATERNITY  LEA VE
100.        A  competent authority may grant to a female officer, maternity leave on full
pay for a period of !180 days from the date of its commencement.
             *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from
24th September, 2009.
155# [G O(P) No. 825/1980/Fin., Dated 31/10/1980]
*[G O(P) No. 521/2003/Fin., Dated  06/10/2003]
@ [Insertion G O(P) No. 59/2006/Fin., Dated  06/02/2006]
![Substitution G O(P) No. 216/2012/Fin., Dated 11/04/2012 ( with effect from 24/09/2009)]CHAP IX ] [ RULE 100 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
  Note 1 .- Maternity leave is also admissible to temporary female officers under
this rule.
  †Note 2 .- [Deleted]
  **Note 3 .-  The female candidates undergoing pre-appointment stipendiary
training may be allowed leave for maternity purpose to the extentenvisaged under this rule on full rate of stipend admissible.  The
benefit of this leave may also be granted in the case of miscarriage/
abortion subject to the same conditions as laid in Rule 101 below.
   This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect  from 1
st
August 1973.
  Note 4 .-  # Maternity leave under this rule and Rule 101 shall be admissible to
provisional female recruits continuing in service *in a single department
beyond one year provided they would continue in service but for
proceeding on such leave.
  This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from the
2nd July 1969.
  *This amendement shall come into force w.e.f. 21st August, 2000.
  @Note 5 . – Female recruits through Public Service Commission who join
duty within !180 days from their date of delivery (otherwise than on
account of miscarriage) shall, on joining, be granted from the next daythe balance portion of maternity leave admissible as on the date of
joining duty, subject to the following condictions:
†[G O(P) No. 96/1981/Fin., Dated  05/02/1981]
**[G O(P) No. 308/1974/Fin., Dated 20/09/1974]
156†[G O(P) No. 413/1990/Fin., Dated 07/08/1990]! [Insertion G O(P) No. 243/2012/Fin., Dated  27/04/2012  (with effect from 30/12/2009)]CHAP IX ] LEA VE [ RULES 100-101
 (a)     Holidays/vacation falling immediately after the date of joining
service cannot be prefixed to the leave.
 (b)    A certificate from the medical officer who attended the delivery
showing the date of delivery along with the medical certificate ofhealth as prescribed in Rule 13, Part I of Kerala Service Rules
should be produced.
              This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force at once .
 !Note 6 .- Female Officers on maternity leave who get appointment in another
Department or in the same Department by direct recruitment or by
transfer or by promotion shall be allowed to avail the balance portion
of maternity leave from the next day of  her joining duty in the new postor department subject to the following conditions:
 (a)     The maximum period of leave admissible under this rule including
intervening holidays and vacation, in both the departments or
posts together, shall be 180 days.
(b)    The proceedings or order of the previous department from which
the maternity leave was avalied should be produced in the new
office or department to avail the second spell of maternity leave.
(c)    A certificate to the effect that such premature cancellation of
maternity leave and rejoining is for satisfying the
administrative or technical requirement, in order to join duty
in another department or post shall be produced and the sameshall be recorded in the service register.
   Ruling
          
†The expression ‘full pay’ occurring in the above rule means pay as
admissible to an officer under Rule 92, Part I, Kerala Service Rules.
101.        Leave under Rule 100 above may also  be granted to female officers in cases
of miscarriage including abortion subject to the condition that the leave does
157** [G O(P) No. 428/1979/Fin., Dated 24/04/1979]CHAP IX ] [ RULES 101-102A KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
not exceed six weeks and application for the leave is supported by a certificate
from the medical attendant.
101.A   # Leave under Rule 100 may also be granted to female officers in cases of
hysterectomy subject to the condition that the leave does not exceed 45
days and application for the leave is supported by a certificate from the
medical attendent.
102.      Maternity leave may be combined with leave of any other kind but leave
applied for in continuation of the former may be granted only if the requestbe supported by a medical certificate:
              **Provided that no medical certificate shall be necessary for grant of any leave for a
period not exceeding sixty days in continuation of maternity leave.
             **Effective from 5
th June 1978.
  Note .- Regular leave in continuation of maternity leave may also be granted
to a female officer on her producing a medical certificate to the
effect that the new born baby requires personal attention of the
mother and her presence by the side of the baby is absolutely
necessary.
  Explanation .—The kinds of leave coming under regular leave mentioned in
the Note are Earned Leave, Half  Pay Leave, Leave Not Due and Leave
Without Allowances only
! SECTION  IX A
CHILD  ADOPTION  LEAVE
102.A      The competent authority may grant Child Adoption Leave for a period up to
†180 days to female State Government Employees who are adoptive mothers
# [Insertion G O(P) No. 216/2012/Fin., Dated 11/04/2012 (with effect from 01/04/2009)]
*[G O(P) No. 428/1979/Fin., Dated  24/04/1979]
! [Insertion G O(P) No.76/2010/Fin., Dated 18/03/2010 (with effect from 31/08/2007)]
†[Substitution G O(P) No. 244/2012/Fin., Dated  27/04/2012 (with effect from 06/02/2010)]
158*[Insertion G O(P) No. 27/2013/Fin., Dated  15/01/2013 (with effect from 26/02/2011)]CHAP IX ] LEA VE [ RULES 102A-102B
with fewer than two surviving children, from the date of legal adoption of a
child up to one year of age with full pay and allowances as admissible underrule 92, part 1 Kerala Service Rules.
              The grant of leave is subject to the further conditions:-                  (a)    that the leave will be allowed to be combined with other kinds of leave
except leave  without allowances under Appendix XII A/XII B/XII CPart 1 Kerala Service Rules.
                (b)    that the regular leave (including leave not due and commuted leave) for a
period up to one year reduced by the age of the adopted child on the dateof legal adoption without taking into account the period of child adoptionleave, applied for in continuation of Child Adoption Leave will be grantedif the request is supported by Medical Certificate to the effect that theadopted child requires personal attention of the mother and her presenceby the side of the baby is absolutely necessary:
             Provided that no Medical Certificate shall be necessary for grant of any leave for a
period not exceeding sixty days in continuation  of Child Adoption Leave.
               (c)   that such leave will not be debited against the leave account, but its
details shall be entered in the Service Book of the employee.
* S
ECTION   IX B
PATERNITY  LEA VE
102 B.    The competent authority may grant paternity leave for a period up to 10 days
to male State Government Employees during the confinement of his wife fortwo deliveries, with full pay and allowances as admissible under rule 92 ofPart I, Kerala Service Rules. The grant of such leave shall be subject to thefollowing further conditions, namely:-
159![Substitution G O(P) No. 406/2013/Fin., Dated 27/08/2013 (with effect from 01/07/2009)]CHAP IX ] [ RULES 102B-103 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
*[G O(P) No. 132/2002/Fin., Dated  14/03/2002]                (a)     that the leave will be granted for a period up to 10 days before or within
three months after the date of delivery.
              (b)      that the leave will be granted only if the request for leave is supported by
a certificate from the Medical Officer showing either the expected date of
delivery or the exact date of delivery , depending on whether the leavecommences before or after the delivery, as the case may be.
                  (c)     that the leave will be allowed to be combined with other kinds of leave
except leave without allowance under Appendix XII A/XII B/ XII C,Part I, Kerala Service Rules.
             (d)   that such leave will not be debited against the leave account but its
details shall be entered in the Service Book of the employee.
S
ECTION  X
HOSPITAL  LEA VE
103.        A competent authority may grant hospital leave to officers of the following
classes while under medical treatment for illness or injury, if such illness or
injury is directly due to risks incurred in the course of their official duties.—
                (a)   * Police Officers of rank not higher than that of Head Constable and
Fire Service Personnel of and below the rank of Leading Fireman,
including Driver, Mechanics and Fireman Drivers.
                (b)    Forest subordinates, other than clerks in receipt of pay not exceeding
! ````` 14620.
                      This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect
from 1st July 2009.
                  (c)    Head warders or warders, male or female,  of jails or lunatic asylums and
Matrons of the Jails Department.
160†[G O(P) No. 308/1985/Fin., Dated 29/05/1985]![G O(P) No. 143/1968/Fin., Dated  16/04/1968]
**[G O(P) No. 320/1975/Fin., Dated 17/07/1975]CHAP IX ] LEA VE [ RULES 103-104
               (d)    Subordinates employed in Government Laboratories.
         (e)  Subordinates of other departments employed in the working of
Government machinery.
                (f)    Last grade employees of all departments.
               (g)    Guards and Preventive Officers of the Excise Department, and
              ! (h)    Government Servants drawing a pay of  ` ` ` ` ` 120 or less per mensem who
serve as Home Guard V olunteer.
   † Note 1 .- Hospital leave will be granted only on production by the employee
concerned of a medical certificate from his  authorised medical attendant
to the effect that the leave recommended is necessary to effect a cureand a certificate from his head of office to the effect that the illness or
injury was directly due to risk incurred in the course of official duties.
   Note 2 .- Hospital leave is admissible to temporary employees also under this
rule.
  ! Note 3 .- Hospital leave will be granted to the officers coming under clause
(h) above only in cases of injuries sustained while on duty as HomeGuard V olunteers and only if the application is supported by a certificate
from the Commandant General, Home Guards, to the effect that the
injury was sustained by the employee while on active duty as a HomeGuard V olunteer.  This will be in addition to the certificate prescribed in
Note 1 above.
104.       **Hospital leave may be granted for such period as the authority granting it
may consider necessary, on leave salary (1) equal to leave salary while onearned leave, for the first 120 days of any period of such leave; and (2) equal
to leave salary during half pay leave, for the remaining period of any such
leave.  In the case of a person to whom the Workmen’s Compensation Act,
161*[G O(P) No. 522/1967/Fin., Dated  04/12/1967]
†[G O(P) No. 337/1960/Fin., Dated  02/07/1960]CHAP IX ] [ RULES 104-106 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
# [Government Decision No. 1/2014 vide  G O(P) No. 20/14/Fin., Dated  15/01/2014]1923, applies, the amount of leave salary payable under this rule shall be
reduced by the amount of compensation payable under section 4 (1) (d) ofthe said Act.
105.      *[Omitted]
106.        Hospital leave is not debited against the leave account and may be combined
with any other leave which may be admissible.
              Government Decision
            A  register in the form, given below will be maintained by all Heads of
Departments and offices showing the various kinds of special leave
#(e.g., special disability leave, hospital leave, maternity leave, leave not
due, commuted leave, paternity leave, child adoption leave etc.) granted
to Government  servants from time to time to facilitate the check by the
local audit parties as to whether the conditions for the grant of the leavehave been fulfilled in individual cases, by the authorities competent to
sanction the leave.
† Register for recording particulars of special kinds of leave e.g., maternity
leave, special disability leave, hospital leave, leave not due, etc.
Name and
designation
of the officerNature
of leavePeriodParticulars
of
sanctionInitials of
authority
competent
to attest
entries in
the Service
BookRemarks
From To No. Date
1 2 3 45 6 78
162SECTION  XI
LEA VE  TO  PART-TIME  OFFICERS
107.      A Law Officer, if his pay is fixed at a definite rate but his whole time is not
retained for the service of Government may be granted leave as follows:
               (a)    Leave on full pay during vacation of the Court within whose jurisdiction
he serves,provided that no extra expense is hereby caused to Government.
Such leave will be counted as duty.
               (b)   Leave on half pay for not more than three months once only in his
service after three years of duty.
                   (c)   On medical certificate, leave on half-pay upto a maximum of six months
at any one time, provided that two years of duty must intervene between
any two periods of leave on medical certificate.
                (d)   On the conditions prescribed in Rule 88 leave without allowances.
108.        Leave under any one of the clauses of Rule 107 may be combined with leave
under any other clause.
109.       An officer remunerated by honoraria may be granted leave on the terms laid
down in Rules 107 and 108 provided that he makes satisfactory arrangementsfor the performance of his duties, that no extra expense is caused to
Government and that during leave of the kind contemplated by clause (b) of
Rule 107 the whole of the honoraria is paid to the person who officiates in hispost.
110.       Leave of the following kinds may be granted to an apprentice:-
                (a)   On medical certificate, leave on leave salary equivalent to half-pay for a
period not exceeding one month in any year of apprenticeship.
                (b)   Leave without allowances under Rule 88.CHAP IX ] LEA VE [ RULES 107-110
163*[G O(P) No. 92/1968/Fin., Dated 06/03/1968]
**[G O(P) No. 953/1986/Fin., Dated 27/12/1986]
†[G O(P) No.654/1995/Fin., Dated 10/10/1995]
# [G O(P) No.1002/1997/Fin., Dated  06/11/1997]CHAP IX ] [ RULES 110A-110D KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
SECTION  XI A
LEA VE  TO  RADIATION  WORKERS
110 A .  *Rules for the grant of leave to radiation workers in the State Medical
Service are given in Appendix XII.
SECTION  XI  B
LEA VE  FOR  TAKING  UP  EMPLOYMENT  ABROAD  OR
WITHIN  INDIA
110 B.      **Rules for the grant of leave without  allowances for taking  up employment
abroad or within India are given in Appendix XII A.
              This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 16th
December, 1983.
   SECTION  XI C
LEAVE  FOR  THE  PURPOSE  OF  STUDY  FOR  THOS E INELIGIBLE  FOR
LEA VE  UNDER  RULE  88  OR  RULE  91  OF  PART  I
110 C.    †Rules for the grant of leave for study purpose for those ineligible for leave
under Rule 88 or Rule 91of Part I are given in Appendix XII B.
              This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 18th
September 1984.
SECTION  XI D
LEA VE  FOR  JOINING  SPOUSE
110 D.    # Rule for the grant of leave without allowances for the purpose of joining
spouse are given in Appendix XIIC.
164* [G O(P) No. 228/1976/Fin., Dated  02/08/1976]CHAP IX ] LEA VE [ RULES 110D-116
               This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 12th
April 1984.
SECTION  XII
CASUAL  LEA VE
111.        Rules regarding Casual Leave to Officers are given in Appendix VII.
SECTION  XIII
PROCEDURE  RELATING  TO  LEA VE
112.       A leave account shall be maintained for each officer.
   Note .- Leave account of a Gazetted Officer will be maintained by the Audit
Officer.  The leave account of a non-gazetted officer will be maintainedby the Head of the Office in which he is employed.
113.         An application for leave or an extension of leave must be made to the authority
competent to grant such leave or extension in Form No. 13.
114.      *Leave to officers on foreign service in India will be sanctioned by the
foreign employer.
115.         Medical officers must not recommend the grant of leave in any case in which
there appears to be no reasonable prospect that the officer concerned willnever be fit to resume his duties.  In such cases the opinion that the officeris permanently unfit for Government service should be recorded in the MedicalCertificate.
116.        Every certificate of a medical committee or a medical officer  recommending
the grant of leave to an officer must contain a proviso that no recommendationcontained in it shall be evidence of a claim to any leave not admissible to theofficer under the terms of his contract or of the rules to which he is subject.
165*[G O(P) No. 430/1973/Fin., Dated  20/11/1973]CHAP IX ] [ RULE 117 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
117.         Before an officer can be granted leave or an extension of leave on medical
certificate, he must obtain a certificate in the following form from such
medical authority as the Government may by general or special order
prescribe.
* Medical  Certificate
……………………….
(Signature of the applicant)
         I (Name) …………………………………… after careful personal
examination of the case hereby certify that (Name and official address)…………………. whose signature is given above, is suffering from…………………….. and that I consider that a period of absence fromduty of ………………………… with effect from ……………………. isabsolutely necessary for the restoration of his/her health.
Signature of Medical Officer…………………..
Registration No. ……………………………….
Part of Registration ……….…………………...System of Medicine ….………………………..
  Note 1 .-The possession of  a certificate as prescribed in this rule does not in
itself confer upon the officer concerned any right to leave.
  Note 2 .-The nature and probable duration of the illness should be specified.
  Note 3 .-This form should be adhered to as closely as possible, and should be
filled in after the signature of the applicant has been taken.  Thecertifying officer is not at liberty to certify that the applicant requires achange to (or from) a particular locality, or that he is not fit to proceedto a particular locality.  Such certificate should only be given at theexplicit desire of the administrative authority concerned, to whom it is
166*[G O(P) No. 512/1961/Fin., Dated  27/12/1961]CHAP IX ] LEA VE [ RULE 117
open to desire when an application on such grounds has been made to
him, whether the applicant should go before a Medical Board to decidethe question of his fitness for service.
  Note  4.-No recommendation contained in this certificate shall be evidence of
a claim to any leave not admissible to the officer under the terms of hiscontract or of the rules to which he is subject.
  Note 5 .-Reciprocal arrangements have been entered into with the Mysore
Government to the effect that officers including police personnel ofone State while staying in the other will be examined free of cost by aMedical Board or a Medical Officer employed under the Governmentof the State concerned for purposes of grant or extension of leave andfitness to resume duty on the expiry of leave.  A medical requisitionfrom the competent authority will be required before the medicalexamination is conducted.
               Government Decision
          * For the purpose of this rule, the Medical Certificates issued by the
following medical authorities will be accepted provided that the certificatesare in accordance with the provisions of the above rule :-
                    1.   Medical Officers of Government not below the rank of an Assistant
Surgeon.
                   2.    Private Medical Practitioners of Modern Medicine registered in Part A
of the register of Modern Medicines.
                     3.    Ayurveda Physicians and Homeopathic Doctors attached to Government
Hospitals and Dispensaries.
                     4.    Private Practitioners of Indigenous Medicines registered in Class A of the
Register of Indigenous  Medicines; and
167*[G O(P) No. 118/1965/Fin., Dated  03/04/1965]
**[G O(P) No. 405/1976/Fin., Dated  28/12/1976]
†, # [G O(P) No. 192/1976/Fin., Dated  08/07/1976]CHAP IX ] [ RULES 117-118 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
                     5.    Private Homeopathic Practitioners registered in Class A of the Register
of Homeopathic Medicines.
              Notwithstanding anything contained herein, in the case of applications
for ‘leave not due’ under Rule 85, Part I, Kerala Service Rules, MedicalCertificate granted by the authorities mentioned in items 1 and 3 aloneshall be accepted.
*118.(a)  In the case of certificate issued by an Assistant Surgeon, Ayurvedic Physician
or Homeopathic Doctor attached to a Government Hospital or Dispensary ora private Practitioner of  **Modern, Indigenous or Homeopathic Medicine,the authority competent to sanction leave may at its discretion, secure asecond medical opinion by requesting a Civil Surgeon, District IndigenousMedical Officer or the Chief Medical Officer, 
† Department of Homeopathy
as the case may be, to have the applicant medically examined.  Should itdecide to do so, it must arrange for the second examination to be made onthe earliest possible date after the date on which the first medical opinionwas given.
      (b)  It shall be the duty of the Civil Surgeon, the District Indigenous Medical
Officer or the Chief Medical Officer, #
 Department of Homeopathy as the case
may be, to express an opinion, both as regards the facts of the illness and asregards the necessity for the amount of leave recommended.  For this purpose,he may require the applicant to appear either before himself or before a MedicalOfficer nominated by him.
       (c)  If the authority competent to sanction leave has doubts about the second
medical opinion also he may refer the case to the Medical Board, constituted
by the Director of Health Services on requisition.
168# [G O(P) No. 233/1976/Fin., Dated 04/08/1976]
*[G O(P) No. 839/1992/Fin., Dated  04/11/1992]CHAP IX ] LEA VE [ RULES 118A-121
118.A    When the competent authority has genuine doubts about the fitness of an
officer, it may refer him to a single man Medical Board or the standing MedicalBoard, for expert medical opinion.  If the medical report is that the officer isnot physically fit or mentally sound, the officer may be deemed to haveentered on eligible leave from the date of the medical report, even if theofficer does not put in a leave application.  If he does not produce a certificatefrom the Medical Board that he is physically fit or mentally sound and hasbeen cured of his illness within a period of five years from the date on whichhe was deemed to have entered on leave, he may be deemed to have retiredon invalid pension.  If the actual date of retirement of the officer falls withinthis period of five years he shall retire on that date.
 # Note  .- Eligible leave means leave due and admissible to an officer and the
order of sanctioning this leave will be earned leave and half-pay leave*or commuted leave.  If there is no eligible leave, leave without allowancewill be granted to regularise the period of absence.
119.          In support of an application for leave, or for an extension of leave, on medical
certificate, from an officer of the last grade, the authority competent to grantthe leave may accept such certificate as it may deem sufficient.
120.     No leave may be granted to a Gazetted Officer until a report as to the
admissibility of the leave has been obtained from the audit officer.
121.       In cases where all applications for leave cannot, in the interest of the public
service, be granted, an authority competent to grant leave should, in decidingwhich application should be granted, take into account the following
considerations :-
                (a)   The officer who can, for the time being , best be spared.
                (b)   The amount of leave due to the various applicants.
169CHAP IX ] [ RULES 121-122 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
              (c)   The amount and character of the service rendered by each applicant
since he last returned from leave.
              (d)   The fact that any such applicant was compulsorily recalled from his last
leave.
                   (e)     The fact that any such applicant has been refused leave in public interest.
122. (i)  When a medical authority has reported that there is no reasonable prospect
that a particular officer will ever be fit to return to duty, leave should not
necessarily be refused to such officer.  It may be granted, if due, by a competentauthority on the following  conditions:-
                   (a)    If the medical authority  is unable to say with certainty that the officer
will never again be fit for service, leave not exceeding twelve months in
all may be granted.  Such leave should not be extended without further
reference to a Medical Board.
             (b)   If an officer is declared by a medical authority to be completely and
permanently incapacitated for further service, leave or an extension ofleave may be granted to him after the  report of the medical authority
has been received, provided that the amount of leave as debited against
the leave account together with any period of duty beyond the date ofthe medical authority’s report does not exceed six months.
     (ii)  An officer who is declared by a medical authority to be completely and
permanently incapacitated for further service shall—
                   (a)    If he is on duty, be invalidated from service from the date of relief of his
duties, which should be arranged without delay on receipt of the reportof the medical authority.  If, however, he is granted leave under sub-rule
(i) above he shall be invalidated from service on  the expiry of such
leave; and
             (b)  if he is already on leave, he is invalidated from service on the
expiry of that leave or extension of leave, if any, granted to him
under sub-rule (i).
170*[Circular No. Fin., R.A. 33409/1960, Dated 08/08/1960]
†[G O(P) No. 558/1962/Fin., Dated 12/11/1962]CHAP IX ] LEA VE [ RULES 123-124
123.       Leave shall not be granted to an officer whom a competent authority has
decided to dismiss, remove or compulsorily retire from Government
service.
124.       An officer returning from leave is not entitled, in the absence of specific
orders to that effect, to resume as a matter of course, the post which he
held before going on leave.  He must report his return to duty and awaitorders.
               Government Decision No. 1
         *Whenever an order sanctioning leave to an officer is issued and
communicated, it should contain directions as to where the officer should
rejoin duty on the expiry of the leave, any change that may take place in
the position of the officer during the period  of leave being alsocommunicated to the authorities concerned under intimation to the
Accountant General wherever necessary.
              
 Government Decision No. 2
           †An officer on leave should intimate sufficiently early his intention of
rejoining duty after leave so as to avoid any possible delay in the issue
of posting orders in time.
171CHAP X ] [ RULE 125 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
CHAPTER X
JOINING TIME
125.       Joining time may be granted to an officer to enable him—
                (a)    to join a new post to which he is appointed while on duty in his old
post; or
                (b)   to join a new post,-
  (i)    on return from earned leave;
 (ii)   When he has not had sufficient notice of his appointment to the
new post, on return from leave other than that specified in Sub-clause (i)
   Note  1.- An officer deputed for training will be allowed for the onward and
return journeys, the time actually required for the journeys, by theusual  mode of conveyance, between the place of training and thestation from/to which he proceeds, and the time so taken will be treatedas part of deputation period for training.
   Note  2.- Probationers and approved probationers in one service (including
other officiating officers for whom no probation has been prescribed)when appointed to the same or another service by direct recruitmentshall be allowed the minimum joining time (i.e., actual journey time) andtransit pay, provided that the posts held by them prior to transfer orthe posts to which they are appointed remain vacant during the period.They shall not, however, be allowed Travelling Allowance.
              [Effective from 22
nd August 1960]
               Ruling No. 1
Joining time under Rule 125 (b) (i), Part I, Kerala Service Rules, will be
admissible only in cases where an officer has proceeded on and has returned
172*[G O(Ms) No. 11/1967/PD., Dated  17/01/1967]
# [G O(P) No. 48/1966/Fin., Dated 10/02/1966]CHAP X ] JOINING TIME [ RULES 125-126A
from earned leave proper and is posted to join a new post.  In all other cases,
it should be regulated under sub-clause (b) (ii) ibid.
          Ruling No. 2
              A gazetted officer deputed for training should relinquish charge of his post
and prepare a charge report even if no officiating  arrangement is made in his
place.  He should also intimate to the Audit Officer concerned, through theTraining Institute/Officer, etc., the date and hour of reporting for trainingand on relief on the completion of training.
               Government Decision
            *Retired officers re-employed in Government service will be treated on  par
with  provisional hands appointed under General Rule 9 (a) (i) of the KeralaState and Subordinate Services Rules, 1958 for purposes of joining time andonly the actual journey time allowed as joining time.
126.         Not more than one day is allowed to an officer in order to join a new post when
the appointment to such post does not necessarily involve a change ofresidence from one station to another.  A holiday or Sunday counts as a dayfor the purpose of this rule.  No joining time is admissible in cases where thechange of post does not involve an actual change of office.
   #Note .- A transfer shall be held to involve a change of station only if
the distance between the two places is not less than eightkilometres.
126A .   When holiday(s) follow(s) joining time, the normal joining time may be
deemed to have been extended to cover such holiday(s).
173*[G O(P) No. 38/1973/Fin., Dated  05/02/1973]               (a)   An officer is allowed—
 (i)     For the portion of
the journeywhich he travelsby aircraft
(ii)    For the portion of
the journeywhich he travelsor might travel:              Actual time occupied in
the journey
One day for each or any
longer time actually
occupied in the journey.                 By railway                        500 kilometres
               By ocean steamer        350 kilometres                 By river steamer          150 kilometres
                  By motor vehicles       150 Kilometres
                Or by conveyance
plying for public hire
in any other way
           25 kilometres CHAP X ] [ RULES 126A-127 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
              Ruling
                  *When officers are transferred while on leave, joining time need be reckoned
only from the date following the holiday(s), if any, suffixed to leave with thepermission of the leave sanctioning authority unless otherwise directed inthe transfer order.
127.       The joining time of an officer, in cases involving a transfer from one station to
another, is subject to a maximum of 30 days.  Six days are allowed for preparationand, in addition, a period to cover the actual journey calculated as follows: -
174(b)     (i)     For purposes of journey by air under clause (a) (i), a part of a day
should be treated as one day.
(ii)    A day is also allowed for any fractional portion of any distance
prescribed in clause (a) (ii).
                   (c)     When part of the journey is by steamer, the limit of six days for preparation
may be extended to cover any period unavoidably spent in awaiting thedeparture of the steamer.
             (d)    Travel by road not exceeding eight kilometres to or from a railway
station or steamer ghat at the beginning or end of journey does notcount for joining time.
                (e)    A Sunday does not count as a day for the purpose of the calculations
in this rule, but Sundays are included in the maximum period of 30days.
  Exception 1.- The authority sanctioning the transfer may, in special
circumstances, reduce the period of joining time admissible under thisrule.
   Exception 2.- In the case of officers who are entrusted with the custody
of stores, a period of not more than ten days and in the case ofofficers in charge of Timber Depots of the Forest Department aperiod of not more than one week will be allowed for transfer ofcharge of check conjointly stores and other materials, the minimumtime actually required in each case alone being, however, utilisedfor the purpose.
  Exception 3.- A period of not more than one week will be allowed to Forest
Guards for transfer of charge and join perambulation of the beats, theminimum time actually required alone being, however, utilised  for thepurpose.  This period will be treated as an extension of joining time inrespect of the relieving officer.CHAP X ] JOINING TIME [ RULE 127
175* [G O(P) No. 52/1966/Fin., Dated 14/02/1966]
† [G O(P) No. 461/1968/Fin., Dated 24/08/1968]CHAP X ] [ RULES 128-130 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
128.          Except in the case of a journey performed by air, by whatever route an officer
actually travels, his joining time shall, unless a competent authority for special
reasons otherwise orders, be calculated by the route which travellers
ordinarily use.
               Government Decision
                 * Except in cases of journeys performed by air, which will be covered by the
provisions in sub-rule (a) of Rule 127, the entitlement to joining time of a
Government servant, in cases where his old headquarters and new
headquarters are connected by railway, should be calculated as admissiblefor a journey by railway.
129.         If an officer is authorised to make over charge of a post elsewhere than at its
headquarters, his joining time shall be calculated from the place at which hemakes over charge.
130.      If an officer is appointed to a new post while in transit from one post to
another, his joining time begins on the day following that on which he receives
the order of appointment.
   Note . - A second period of 6 days for preparation should not be allowed in
calculating the joining time of an officer who is appointed to a new
post, while in transit from one post to another.
               Government Decision
            
 † In the case of a Government servant who is transferred from one post to
another but whose transfer is subsequently cancelled after he has handed
over charge of his old post but before he could take charge of the new post,
the period intervening between the date of handing over charge of the oldpost and taking over the same later on account of cancellation of transfer
orders, should be treated as joining time, subject to the provisions of Rule
130 and the Note thereunder.
176CHAP X ] JOINING TIME [ RULES 131-134
131.        If a Government servant takes leave while in transit from one post to another,
the period which has elapsed since he handed over charge of his old post
must be included in his leave.  On the expiry of the leave, the Government
servant may be allowed normal joining time.
132.       If an officer is appointed to a new post while on earned leave he is entitled to
joining time  calculated  from his old station in addition to the earned leave.
Should the officer join the new appointment before the expiry of leave plus
joining time admissible, the period short taken should be considered as leavenot enjoyed and a corresponding portion of the leave sanctioned should be
cancelled without any reference  to the authority which granted the leave.
When  vacation or holidays immediately preceding vacation begin during orimmediately after  the expiry of joining time admissible to an officer or when
an officer is transferred during  vacation, he may be allowed to join at the end
of the vacation.
133.      The Government  may in any case extend the joining time admissible under
these rules, provided that the general spirit of the rules, is observed.
134.      Within the prescribed maximum of 30 days, the Government may, on such
conditions as it thinks fit, grant to an officer a longer period of joining time
than is admissible under the rules in the following circumstances:-
                     (a)   When the officer has been unable to use the ordinary mode of travelling
or, notwithstanding due diligence on his part, has spent  more time onthe journey than is allowed by the rules; or
                   (b)   When such extension is considered necessary for the public convenience
or for the saving of such public expenditure as is caused by unnecessaryor purely formal transfers; or
                  (c)   When the rules have in any particular case operated harshly; as for
example, when an officer has, though no fault on his part missed a
steamer or fallen sick on the journey.
177*[G O(P) No.1010/1987/Fin., Dated  27/11/1987]CHAP X ] [ RULES 135-137 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
135.     When an officer under the administrative control of the Government is
transferred to the control of another Government which has made rules
prescribing amounts of joining time, his joining time for the journey to
join his post under the Government, and for the return journey will begoverned by those rules.
136.       *A Government servant on joining time shall be regarded as on duty during
that period and shall be entitled to joining time pay equal to the pay whichwas drawn before relinquishment  of charge in the old post.  He shall also be
entitled to Dearness Allowance, if any, appropriate to the joining time pay.  In
addition, he can also draw compensatory allowances, and house rentallowance as applicable to the old station from which he was transferred.  He
shall not be allowed conveyance allowance or Permanent Travelling
Allowance.
  Note.- An Officer on transfer is not entitled for joining time unless his transfer
is made in the public interest.  However, in cases of transfers on request,
an officer shall be paid joining time pay and allowances at the rateadmissible under this rule for the period spent in travelling to join the
new post and if he could not take charge on the new post on the day on
which he is to join consequent on that day being declared a holiday,then, for that day also.
  Explanation.- There is no objection to an officer being granted regular leave
by the competent authority under the leave rules applicable to himeven if the transfer is at his own request to cover the period of handing
over charge at an old station and before taking over charge at another
if the officer applied for it and the competent authority is willing togrant such leave.
137.       An officer who does not join his post within his joining time, is entitled to no
pay or leave salary after the end of the joining time.  Wilful absence from duty
178CHAP X ] JOINING TIME [ RULES 137-138
after the expiry of joining time may be treated as misbehavior for the purpose
of Rule 21.
              Government Decision
             The period of overstayal of joining time of an officer may be regularised by
granting eligible leave under Rule 131,  Part I,  Kerala Service Rules and the
Joining time pay regulated under Rule 136 (b) ibid
138.     A person, in employment other than Government service or on leave
granted from such employment, if in the interest of Government, is
appointed to a post under the Government may, at the discretion ofGovernment, be treated as on joining time while he prepares for and
makes the journey to join the post under Government  and while he
prepares for and makes the journey on reversion from the post underGovernment to return to his original employment.  During such joining
time he shall receive pay equal to the pay, or in the case of joining time
immediately following  leave granted from the private employment, to theleave salary paid to him by his private employer prior to appointment to
Government service, or pay equal to the pay of the post in Government
service, whichever is less.
179*[Circular No. 66494/RA3/61/Fin., Dated 14/10/1961]
†[G O(P) No. 254/1970/Fin., Dated  27/04/1970]
# [Insertion G O(P).No. 45/2013/Fin., Dated  22/01/2013(with effect from 22/01/2013)]CHAP XI ] [ RULES 139-140 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
CHAPTER XI
FOREIGN SERVICE
139.       The rules, in this chapter apply to those officers only who are transferred to
foreign service after these rules come into force.  Officers transferredpreviously will remain subject to the rules in force at the time of transfer.
               Government Decision
         *In cases where the deputation of an officer to foreign service was
sanctioned on a date prior to 1
st November 1959 and the terms originally
fixed extend beyond 1st November 1959, no change in the terms need be
made even if the officer has opted to the Kerala Service Rules, butextension of the period beginning from or after 1
st November 1959 should
conform to the provisions in the Kerala Service Rules, provided the officerconcerned has opted to the Kerala Service Rules, the extension of theterm being treated as a fresh case of deputation.
†140.(a)  No officer may be transferred to foreign service against his will:
Provided that this sub-rule shall not apply to the transfer of an officer to theservice of a body, incorporated or not, which is wholly or substantiallyowned or controlled by the Government.
        (b)   A transfer to foreign service requires the sanction of the Government.
    # (c)   The period of deputation to foreign service shall be initially for one year
and may be extended year by year up to a continuous period of five yearsin the aggregate. The officer on foreign service shall be relieved of hisduties on the date of expiry of the sanctioned period unless the competent
authority has, with requisite approval, extended the period of deputation,
180CHAP XI ] FOREIGN SERVICE [ RULES 140-141
* [G O(P) No. 254/1970/Fin., Dated  27/04/1970]in writing, prior to the date of its expiry. In  the event of the officer
overstaying he shall be liable to disciplinary action and the period ofoverstay shall not be counted for the purpose of pension and that anyincrement due during the period of overstay shall be deferred withcumulative effect, till the date on which the officer rejoins his parentcadre. No ex post facto approval for  regularization of overstay on foreignservice shall be allowed. The officer shall be precluded from drawing payand allowances from the date on which the sanctioned term of foreignservice expires:
             Provided that the period of leave, if any, taken by an officer, as per
rules applicable to him, on the conclusion of foreign service andbefore joining his post shall not be considered as an overstay underthis sub-rule.
             The provisions of this sub-rule shall mutatis mutandis apply to an officer on
deputation from one service to another or from one Department to anotherwithin the same service.
              *No officer shall normally be allowed to remain on deputation to foreign
service for more than five years continuously.  Provisions of Rule 24 willapply to an officer who continues in foreign service for more than fiveyears at a time.
               * Effective from 17
th December 1976.
141.       A transfer to the foreign service is not admissible unless –
            (a)   the duties to be performed after the transfer are  such as should; for
public reasons, be rendered by an officer of Government, and
                 (b)    the officer transferred holds, at the time of transfer, a permanent  or
temporary appointment  paid from the General Revenues or holds a
181CHAP XI ] [ RULES 141-144 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
lien on such an appointment or would hold a lien on such a  post
had his lien not been suspended.
142.         If an officer is transferred to foreign service while on leave, he ceases
from the date of such transfer to be on leave and to draw leave salary.
143.        An officer transferred to foreign service shall remain in the cadre or cadres
in which he was included in a substantive  or officiating capacityimmediately before his transfer, and may be given such substantive orofficiating promotion in those cadres as the authority competent to orderpromotion may decide. In giving promotion, such authority shall takeinto account-
                (a)    the nature of the work performed in foreign service, and
            (b)   the promotion given to juniors in the cadre in which the question of
promotion arises.
144.        An officer in foreign service will draw pay from the foreign employer
from the date on which he relinquishes charge of his post inGovernment Service.  Subject to any restrictions which theGovernment may by general order impose, the amount of his pay, theamount of joining time admissible to him and his pay during suchjoining time will be fixed by the authority sanctioning the transfer inconsultation with the foreign employer.
  Note 1 .-When transfer to foreign service is sanctioned the pay which he
shall receive in such service must be precisely specified in the ordersanctioning the transfer.  If it is intended that he shall receive anyremuneration, or enjoy any concession of pecuniary value, in additionto his pay proper, the exact nature of such remuneration or concessionmust be similarly specified.  No officer will be permitted to receive anyremuneration or enjoy any concession which is not so specified, and ifthe order is silent as to any particular  remuneration or concession, itmust be assumed that the intention is that it shall not be enjoyed.
182@ [G O(P) No. 128/1965/Fin., Dated  08/04/1965]*[Substitution  G O(P) No. 184/2002/Fin., Dated 27/03/2002]
† [G O(P) No. 102/1993/Fin., Dated 10/02/1993]
# [G O(P) No. 254/1970/Fin., Dated  22/04/1970]CHAP XI ] FOREIGN SERVICE [ RULE 144
  Note 2 .- No order of transfer to foreign  service shall be issued without
previous consultation with the Finance Department.  It shall be open
to that department to prescribe by general or special order, cases inwhich its consent may be presumed to have been given.
  *Note 3 .- No deputation allowance shall be paid to the officers on deputation
to foreign service.
   This shall be deemed to have come into force w,e,f, 22
nd July, 1997.
             † Provided that no deputation allowance shall be granted for the period in
excess of five years to an  officer even if deputation is allowed to continuebeyond 5 years continuously.
             
# In cases where the headquarters of the officer is outside Kerala and the
deputation is to institutions/bodies aided by Government industrialundertakings in which Government hold majority of shares and alsoundertakings which are managed by Government, the deputationist’s pay inforeign service shall not exceed his basic pay in Government service bymore than 50 per cent or ````` 300 whichever is less.
           
   # Effective from 17th December 1966.
              @ Provided further that such pay in foreign service shall not exceed the
basic pay in Government service by more than 50 percent or ````` 300
whichever is less.
               This proviso shall apply also to cases of extension of deputation to foreign
service sanctioned from 8th April 1965.
183*[G O(P) No. 621/1970/Fin., Dated  01/09/1970]CHAP XI ] [ RULE 144 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
  Note 4 .- Specific terms in regard  to Travelling Allowance to be allowed to
officers for journeys on transfer to foreign service and on reversiontherefrom should invariably be prescribed in consultation andagreement with the foreign employer.
  Note 5 .- An officer who is eligible for concessions in regard to medical
attendance for himself or his family should not be transferred to foreignservice, unless the foreign employer undertakes to afford to the officerprivileges not inferior to those which he would have enjoyed if he hadbeen employed in the service of Government
 *Note  6 .- No officer to whose children educational concessions are admissible,
should be transferred to foreign service, unless the foreign employerundertakes  to afford these privileges which the officer would haveenjoyed had he been employed  in the service of Government.
  Note 7 .- The transit pay and allowances and transfer Travelling Allowance of
a Government servant who proceeds on transfer from one foreignemployer to another without reverting to Government service shouldbe borne by the foreign employer to whom  the Government servantproceeds on transfer.
   Effective  from November 24, 1967
             
  Government Decision
             †The Heads of Departments, while proposing the deputation of officers to
foreign service and the sections of the Secretariat while sanctioning suchproposals, will attach to the proposals or sanctions, as the case may be, aseparate statement giving the following details :-
                 (i)    Name of the Government servant
                (ii)    Date of Birth
†[Circular Memorandum No. 42765/Rules-3/62/Fin., Dated 15/09/1962]
184*[G O(P) No. 359/1981/Fin., Dated  04/06/1981]CHAP XI ] FOREIGN SERVICE [ RULE 144
               (iii)    To whom lent
               (iv)    Official designation (post held substantively before transfer)
                  (v)      Scale of pay of the post in Government service held substantively  by the
officer
               (vi)    Head of account to which pay was debitable before transfer
              (vii)    Monthly rate of pay sanctioned in foreign service
             (viii)    Service rules applicable
               (ix)     Rate of monthly contributions provisionally fixed under rule:
         (a)   Leave salary
         (b)   Pension
                (x)    When lent
                (xi)   Where to be recovered
               (xii)   Whether creditable to State or Central
              (xiii)     Date of termination of foreign service.
              Ruling No. 1
                  An officer holding a provisional appointment deputed to foreign service,
will be allowed to draw, in foreign service, the pay and allowances attached
to the provisional appointment, only if it is certified by the competentauthority that the officer would have held the provisional appointment
but for his deputation to foreign service.
              Ruling No. 2
             * (i)    For the period from 1-7-1978 to 30-4-1979, Officers on deputation will be
allowed deputation allowance at the rates prescribed in the concerned
185CHAP XI ] [ RULES 144-146 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
Government Order by which the deputation was sanctioned based on
their pre-revision pay in Government Service.
                 (ii)    Those who continue to draw pay in the pre-revision scale on 1-5-1979
are eligible for deputation allowance from 1-5-1979 at the rates specifiedin Note 3 above.  But the minimum of the revised scales of the postsfrom which they are deputed, will be the basis for determining the rateof deputation allowance. “Pay in the pre-revision scale” means the payof the Officer concerned in the scale of pay as it stood as on 30-6-1978.
145.(a)  While an officer is in foreign service contribution towards the cost of his
pension and leave salary must be paid to General Revenues on his behalf.
       (b)   Contributions due under clause (a)  above shall be paid by the officer himself,
unless the foreign employer consents to pay them. They shall be payable duringleave taken while in foreign service.
  Note .-  A copy of the orders sanctioning an officer’s transfer to foreign
service must always be communicated to the Audit Officer.  The Officerhimself should, without delay, communicate a copy to the officer whoaudits his pay, and take his instructions as to the officer to whom he isto account for the contribution;  report to the latter officer the time anddate of all transfers of charge to which he is a party when proceedingon, while in, and on return from foreign service; and furnish from timeto time particulars   regarding his pay in foreign service, leave taken byhim, his postal address, and any other information which that officermay require.
146.     *Recovery of pension contribution in respect of Government servants on
deputation to foreign service shall be at the rate of 15 per cent of the maximumof the scale of pay of the post from which deputation is sanctioned.  If thescale of pay is revised or the Government Servant gets promotion in the
* [G O (P) No. 742/1984/Fin., Dated 15/12/1984]
186* [G O(P) No. 169/1983/Fin., Dated  06/04/1983]
# [G O(P) No. 883/1970/Fin., Dated  02/12/1970]CHAP XI ] FOREIGN SERVICE [ RULE 146
present department the recovery shall be at the rate of 15 per cent of the
maximum of the revised scale of pay or the scale of pay of the post to whichthe officer is promoted in the parent department, as the case may be.
                 The leave salary contribution shall be 10 percent of the maximum of the scale
of pay of the post of the deputationist in the parent department.   If the scale
of pay is revised or the Government servant gets promotion in the parent
department, the recovery shall be at 10 percent of the maximum of the revisedscale of pay or the scale of the post to which the officer is promoted in the
parent department, as the case may be.
               The combined rate of leave salary and pension contribution shall be 25 per
cent of the maximum of the scale of pay.
               Contribution shall be paid for the actual period of duty in the foreign service
including all kinds of leave taken while on foreign service.  Contribution shall
be paid for each calendar month or part thereof and no contribution shall
be paid for the periods of joining time.
  *Note.-  Leave salary contribution will not be realised in respect of Government
officers serving on deputation on foreign service terms, in undertakingswhich are owned or controlled by the State Government. If the officer
avails of leave while on such foreign service, the full expenditure should
be borne by the concerned foreign employer and if the officer avail ofleave after return from the foreign service, the expenditure should be
borne by the Government.
This Note shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1
st April
1982.
              Government Decision.
              # Leave salary and pension contribution will be recovered in whole rupees,
fractions equal to 50 paise being rounded off to the next higher rupee.
187CHAP XI ] [ RULES 146-147 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
Rounding off will be done (1) at the initial stage while calculating the rates of
monthly contributions, (2) while recovering contributions for part of a monthat the beginning or at the end of foreign service and (3)  where rates ofmonthly contributions are refixed due to a change in the rates of pay,deputation allowance, etc., and the total contribution recoverable for acalendar month are not in whole rupees.
          This decision will take effect from 1
st August 1970, i.e., in respect of
contributions for August 1970 recoverable in September 1970.
147.       The rate of pension and leave salary contribution prescribed in Rule 146 is to
secure the officer the pension that he would have earned by service underthe State Government if he had not been transferred to foreign service andthe leave salary on the scale and under the conditions applicable to him.  Incalculating the rate of leave salary admissible for earned leave alone, the paydrawn in foreign service less, in the case of officers paying their own
contributions, such part of the pay as may be paid as contribution, will
count as pay for the  purpose of leave salary; provided that the differencebetween the amount of leave salary that would have been admissible to theofficer had he remained in Government Service and the amount of leavesalary admissible as aforesaid, shall be recovered from the foreign employer.
   Note 1 .-As the rates prescribed for such contribution have been calculated
on the basis of the *leave on full or half pay normally taken by anofficer during the total period of his services and do not take intoaccount any compensatory allowance which may form part of leavesalary, the whole expenditure in respect of any compensatory allowancefor periods of leave in or at the end of foreign service shall be borne bythe foreign employer and a condition to this effect should be insertedin the terms of transfer to foreign service.
* [G O(P) No. 491/1975/Fin., Dated  24/10/1975]
188*[G O(P) No. 491/1975/Fin., Dated  24/10/1975]
†[G O(P) No. 214/1985/Fin., Dated 11/04/1985]! [G O(P) No. 21/1966/Fin., Dated 17/01/1966]CHAP XI ] FOREIGN SERVICE [ RULE 147
   Note  2.- The foreign employers should in the case of officers transferred to
foreign service accept liability of leave salary in respect of disabilityleave granted on account of a disability incurred in and through foreignservice even though such disability manifests itself after the terminationof foreign service.  The leave salary charges for such leave should berecovered direct from foreign employers, a condition to this effect beinginserted in the terms of transfer to  foreign service.
   !Note  3.- Leave salary in respect of maternity leave granted to and enjoyed
by a female Government servant while in foreign service will be borneby the foreign employer.
               
 Government Decision No.1
              * In the case of an officer who takes leave on the conclusion of foreign
service before rejoining his post, the leave salary should be calculatedtaking into account the pay drawn in foreign service also and thedifference in leave salary should be recovered from the foreign employeras provided in the above rule.  Orders sanctioning deputation to foreignservice should specifically include a provision for the recovery ofdifference in the leave salary from the foreign employer.  Leave salary inrespect of leave taken after rejoining duty under Government shall begoverned by the provisions in Rules 92 to 95 above.
            
 †However the recovery contemplated above will not apply in respect of
officers on deputation on foreign service terms to undertakings whichare owned or controlled by the Government, in whose case no leavesalary contributions will be realised.
189* [G O(P) No. 229/1976/Fin., Dated 02/08/1976]CHAP XI ] [ RULE 147 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
                Government Decision No. 2
             * When a Government servant is transferred to foreign service in India, an
extract of the leave account of the Government servant will be furnished tothe foreign employer by the Accountant General in respect of GazettedOfficers and by the Head of Office in respect of Non-Gazetted Officers sothat the foreign employer may determine the leave admissible to theGovernment servant and the leave salary payable to him. Whenever leave isgranted by the foreign employer a copy of the orders granting leave to theGovernment servant may be endorsed by the foreign employer to theAccountant General in respect of Gazetted Officers and to the Head of theoffice of the parent department in the case of Non-Gazetted Officers.  Theforeign employer will pay the leave salary which will be reimbursed to him bythe Accountant General in the case of Gazetted Officers and by the Head ofthe Office (of the parent department) in the case of Non-Gazetted Officers.The claim for the reimbursement of leave salary thus paid by the foreignemployer may be made half yearly for the period from April  to Septemberand October to March.  While sending the claim to the Accountant Generalor Head of Office concerned, the foreign employer will give the name anddesignation of the Government servant, nature and period of leavesanctioned, the number and date of sanction, rate of leave salary and amountof leave salary paid. On receipt of the claim from the foreign employer theAccountant General or Head of Office will verify the claim with reference tothe entries in the leave account and arrange to reimburse the amount bymeans of a bank draft within a month of receipt of the claim. The expenditurewill be debited to the head of account to which the leave salary is debitable.It should be noted that in both cases, the amount of leave salary to bereimbursed to the foreign employer will be the leave salary (excluding DearnessAllowance and other compensatory allowance) to which the Government
190*[G O(P) No. 742/1984/Fin., Dated  15/12/1984]CHAP XI ] FOREIGN SERVICE [ RULES 147-150
servant would have been eligible but for foreign services as the difference
between the leave salary to which the officer is eligible and that he wouldhave received but for foreign services together with Dearness Allowance
and other compensatory allowance is to be finally borne by the foreign
employer.
148.      The Government may -
                  (a)   remit the contributions due in any specified case or class of cases, and
             (b)  make rules prescribing the rate of interest, if any, to be levied on
overdue contributions.
149.      An officer in foreign service may not elect to withhold contributions and
forfeit  right to count as duty in Government service the time spent in foreignemploy.  The contribution paid on his behalf maintains his claim to pension,
or to pension  and leave salary, as the case may be, in accordance with the
rules of the service of which he is a member.  Neither he nor the foreign
employer has any right of property in a contribution paid and no claim for
refund can be entertained.
150.       Contribution for leave salary or pension, due in respect of an officer on
foreign service, may be paid annually within fifteen days from  the end of
each *calendar year or at the end of the foreign service, if the foreignservice expires before the end of a *calendar year, and if the payment is
not made within the said period, interest must be paid to Government on
the unpaid contribution, unless it is specifically remitted by Government,at the rate of two paise per day per ````` 100 from the date of expiry of the
period aforesaid upto the date on which the contribution is finally paid.
The interest shall be paid by the officer or the foreign employer accordingas the contribution is paid by the former or the latter.
191† [G O(P) No. 390/1966/Fin., Dated 20/08/1966]CHAP XI ] [ RULES 151-152 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
151.        An Officer transferred to foreign service may not without the sanction of the
Government accept a pension or gratuity from his foreign employer in respectof such service.
152.     An officer in foreign service may not be granted leave otherwise than in
accordance with the rules applicable to the service of which he is a memberand may not take leave or receive leave salary from Government unless heactually quits duty and goes on leave.
  
 †Exception .- An officer on foreign service out of India may be granted leave
by the foreign employer on such conditions as he may determine.  Inany individual case, the authority sanctioning the transfer maydetermine beforehand, in consultation with the foreign employer,the conditions on which leave will be granted by him.  The leavesalary in respect of leave granted by the foreign employer will bepaid by him and the leave will not be debited against the officer’sleave account.
             This exception shall be deemed to have  come into force with effect from 1
st
March 1965.
   Note .-  An officer on foreign service is himself personally responsible for the
observance of the rules regarding leave in foreign service, by acceptingleave to which he is not entitled under the rules, he renders himselfliable to refund leave salary irregularly drawn, and in the event of hisrefusing to refund, he forfeits his previous service under Governmentand ceases to have any claim on Government in respect of either pensionor leave salary.
               Government Decision No. 1
              *[Deleted]
* [G O(P) No. 477/1997/Fin., Dated  01/04/1997]
192† [G O(P) No. 250/1983/Fin., Dated 11/05/1983]CHAP XI ] FOREIGN SERVICE [ RULES 152-154
               Government Decision No. 2
              *[Deleted]
              * Effective from 30th May 1996.
153.     An Officer in foreign service, if appointed to officiate in a post in
Government service, will draw pay calculated on the pay of the postin Government service on which he holds a lien or would hold a lienhad his lien not been suspended and that of the post in which heofficiates.  His pay in foreign service will not be taken into accountin fixing his pay.
154.       
†An Officer reverts from foreign service to Government service on the date
on which he takes charges of his post in Government service;  provided thatif he takes leave on the conclusion of foreign service before rejoining hispost, his reversion shall take effect from such date as the Government maydecide.
             As and when an order transferring a non-gazetted employee to foreign
service is issued by the competent authority, the head of the office wherethe employee is then working should make an entry in his Service Bookregarding the transfer to foreign service.  The head of office shouldsimultaneously furnish to the Accountant General information regardingthe date of  relief of the transferred officer,  his pay, date of his nextincrement, scale of pay of post held by him at the time of relief etc.  Based
on the sanction and particulars received  from the head of office, theAccountant General will intimate the departmental officer concerned and theforeign employer the foreign service account number assigned to thetransferred officer and the rate of foreign service contribution recoverable in
his case.  On receipt of the communication, the head of office should note in
the Service Book the rate of contribution as fixed  by the Accountant General.
* [G O(P) No. 477/1997/Fin., Dated  01/04/1997]
193CHAP XI ] [ RULE 154 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
At the time of reversion of the employee from foreign service, the head of the
office to which he is posted should intimate the Accountant General the dateof his rejoining State Service and the date of termination of his foreignservice as fixed under Rule 154, Part I, Kerala Service Rules.  On receipt of thesanction reverting the officer to State Service and the particulars about hisrejoining duty, the Accountant General will check whether the foreign servicecontributions have been recovered in full.  As and when the recovery iscompleted, the Accountant General will sent to the head of the office inwhich the Government servant is working at that time a communicationshowing the position about the recovery of contributions; a copy of it willbe simultaneously endorsed to the employee also.  On the strength of thiscommunication, the head of the office should make an entry in the ServiceBook regarding the position about the recovery of foreign servicecontributions, giving reference to the communication received from theAccountant General.  The letter received from the Accountant General inthis regard should be kept in the Service Book itself for facilitating futurereference.  The head of the office and the employee concerned shouldacknowledge the receipt of the communication regarding recovery ofcontributions.  Based on the entries in the Service Book made by the head ofthe office and copies of the Accountant General’s communications kept inthe Service Book, the employee’s pension claims will be settled by theAccountant General at the time of his retirement.  In the event of any disputearising later about the recovery of contributions for want of necessary entriesin the Service Books, the employee concerned may produce his copy of thecommunication received from the Accountant General as proof of recovery.On production of his copy of the communication, the Accountant Generalwill verify the matter and settle his claims accordingly.
                  * While laying down the above procedure, Government would like to impress
upon all departmental officers that the responsibility for making entries relating
* [G O(P) No. 250/1983/Fin., Dated 11/05/1983]
194*[G O(P) No. 192/2002/Fin., Dated  01/04/2002]CHAP XI ] FOREIGN SERVICE [ RULES 154-156
to foreign service in the Service Book of the Non-Gazetted Officers rests with
them.
                Effective from 1st June 1983.
155.       When an officer reverts from foreign service to Government service, his pay
will cease to be paid by the foreign employer and his contributions will bediscontinued with effect from the date of reversion.
156.        When an addition is made to a regular establishment on the condition
that its cost or a definite portion of its cost, shall be recovered fromthe persons for whose benefit the additional establishment  is created,recoveries shall be made under the following rules: -
                 a)    The amount to be recovered shall be the gross sanctioned cost of the
service or of the portion of the service, as the case may be, and shallnot vary with the actual expenditure of any month.
                  b)     The cost of the service shall include contribution at such rates as may
be laid down under Rule 146 and the contributions shall be calculatedon the sanctioned rates of pay of the members of the establishment.
                 c)    The Government may reduce the amount of recoveries or may entirely
forgo them.
  Note .-* “The term ‘gross sanctioned cost of service’ shall also  include
Dearness Allowance and other Compensatory Allowances, Bonus/Special Festival Allowance, Interim Relief, Conveyance Allowance andall other allowances that the employee would have drawn had he beenworking in the Government Service  at  the same place”.   The monthlycompound of bonus/special festival allowance, shall be worked out  at1/12th of the last declared bonus/special festival allowance for effectingrecovery on a monthly basis.
195CHAP XI ] [ RULE 156 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
** [G O(P) No. 446/1993/Fin., Dated 24/08/1993]                Government Decision
           The procedure for the recovery of the cost of an establishment will be as
follows :-
                (i)   Gross Sanctioned cost of the service.- This will include the “average
cost” of the several posts included in the establishment together withthe Dearness Pay, Dearness Allowance, Special Dearness Allowance,Personal Pay/Special Pay, **Bonus/Special Festival Allowance  andother Compensatory Allowance admissible on the “average cost” for
this purpose will be  calculated according to the formula given under
Rule 12 (35), Part I, Kerala Service Rules.
                (ii)    Pension and leave salary contribution.-  This contribution in respect of
a post will be worked out at one-fourth-of the total of the “averagecost” plus Dearness Pay, Special  Pay/Personal Pay **and  Bonus/
Special Festival Allowance admissible on the average cost.
                  
  ** Effective from 29th October 1992
             (iii)   †Calculation of average age at entry in the grade.-
 (a)   In grades where direct recruitment is generally made.-  If the
recruitment is generally made between 18 and 24/25 years, for example,the age of entry can with advantage be adopted uniformly as 21,instead of calculating it on the basis of age of entry of all persons inservice on a date or recruited during a specified period which wouldinvolve unnecessary labour not yielding commensurate advantage.The average cost thus worked out on the above basis may holdgood till there is a revision of scales or other conditions of service,e.g., age of retirement, etc.
† [Circular No. 62/1963/Fin., Dated  09/08/1963 & No. 05/1964/Fin., Dated 16/01/1964]
196CHAP XI ] FOREIGN SERVICE [ RULES 156-159
  (b)    In grades where appointments are generally made by promotion
but occasionally direct recruitment is also resorted to.-  The
factor of age of entry would in this case by depending  on theincidence of promotion in individual establishment  and nouniform age of entry can therefore be indicated.  To get moreaccurate result the age of entry may be arrived at in these caseson the basis of the age of entry of all persons in service in thatgrade on 1
st April of the year in which the occasion to calculate
the average cost arises.  As the basis of average cost itself issomewhat approximate, a change in the age of entry from year toyear is of little consequence and therefore the age of entry thusarrived  at and for that matter the average cost worked out on thatbasis, may hold good for a reasonable period, say 5 years, afterwhich it may be reviewed, unless there is a general revision of the
scales of pay or conditions of services in the meantime.
SERVICE  UNDER   LOCAL   FUNDS
157.       Officers paid from Local Funds which are administered by Government are
subject to the provisions of these service rules.
158.         The transfer of officers to service under Local Funds which are not administered
by Government will be regulated by the rules in this chapter.
159.      Persons transferred to Government service from a Local Fund which is not
administered by Government will be treated as joining a first post underGovernment and their previous service will not count  as duty performed.The Government may, however, allow previous service in such cases tocount as duty performed on such terms as it thinks fit.
             
 Ruling
         The pay of an officer transferred from a Local Fund Institution not
administered by Government to Government service will be fixed at the
197CHAP XI ] [ RULE 159 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I
minimum of the scale of pay of the post in Government service if the pay
he was drawing under the Local Fund is less than the minimum.  In casehe was drawing, under  the Local Fund, pay above the minimum andequal to a stage in the scale of pay of the post in Government service, hispay will be fixed at that stage and if the pay he was drawing under theLocal Fund is not a stage in the scale of pay of the post in Governmentservice it will be fixed at the next lower stage, the difference being treatedas personal pay to be absorbed in future increases in pay.  His next increment
will ordinarily be allowed only after the full incremental period of duty inGovernment service.
198PART II
TRAVELLING ALLOWANCES
199CHAPTER  I
SECTION  I
GRADES OF OFFICERS
1.           For the purpose of calculating Travelling Allowances, officers are classified
into the following four grades :-
            †(i)   First  Grade .-  All officers in receipt of actual pay of † ````` 3000 and
above, and officers belonging to All India Services, non-All IndiaService Officers holding posts borne on the cadre of All IndiaServices, Heads of Departments and Officers of the Indian Army,Navy or Air Force appointed as Aides-de-camp to the Governorirrespective of the pay drawn by them.
             (ii)   Second  Grade .- (a)  Officers  in receipt of actual pay of 
† ````` 2,500  and
above but below † ````` 3,000.
                                                     (b)  Officers  in receipt of actual pay of †````` 1,600  and
above but below † ````` 2,500.
               (iii)   Third  Grade  .-  Officers  in receipt of actual pay of † ````` 950  and above but
below † ````` 1,600.
               (iv)  Fourth  Grade .- Officers  in receipt of basic pay below † ````` 950.
                       †These amendments shall be deemed to have come into force on 18th
July 1994.
  Note- 1 .- All Private Secretaries to Ministers and the Private Secretary to the
Speaker will be treated as Grade I Officers from 28th June 1969 and 2nd
September 1969 respectively for purposes of Travelling Allowances,irrespective of the pay drawn by them.
†[G O(P) No. 391/2002/Fin., Dated 19/06/2002]CHAP I ] [ RULE 1 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
200TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES
*[G O(P) No. 438/1968/Fin., Dated  19/08/1968]CHAP I ] [ RULE 1
  *Note 2 .- For the purpose of calculating the T.A. for accompanying the
Governor, Advisers or Ministers on tour, non-gazetted officers, otherthan those in the last grade, will be treated as Second Grade (b) officersirrespective of the “actual pay” drawn by them.
   Note  3.- The term ‘pay’ occurring in this part of the rules should be deemed
to include only - Pay as defined in Rule 12 (23) (i) and (iii) of Part I,Kerala Service Rules, and personal pay, dearness pay and special paytreated as coming under classes I and II under Appendix IV , KeralaService Rules.
   Note  4.- The classification of a re-employed  pensioner for purposes of
Travelling Allowances will be determined on the following basis –
 (a)   Where the pension is held in abeyance during the period of re-
employment, the grade of the re-employed pensioner shall be
determined, in accordance with the pay actually received from
time to time.
 (b)    Where a pension is allowed to be drawn in addition to pay, the re-
employed pensioner should be deemed to be in receipt of actualpay equivalent to his re-employed pay plus pension, subject tothe proviso that if the sum of such pay plus pension exceeds thepay of the post if it is on a fixed rate of pay or the maximum pay ofthe post, if it is on a time-scale of pay, such excess shall be ignored.
 (c)     If a portion of the pension has been commuted, the amount of
pension to be taken into account for the purpose of clause ( b)
will  be the amount including the pensionary equivalent of thecommuted value.  The amount of pension to be taken intoaccount will also include the pension equivalent of the death-cum-retirement gratuity, if any.
201*[G O(P) No. 391/2002/Fin., Dated 19/06/2002]
†[G O(Ms.) No. 452/1960/Fin., Dated 21/09/1960]
# [G O(P) No. 667/1969/Fin., Dated 15/12/1969]CHAP I ] [ RULES 1-4 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
  *Note 5 .- Class IV employees drawing pay of  `  `  `  `  `  950 and above consequent
on getting time bound grade promotion shall be included under ThirdGrade for the limited purpose of Travelling Allowance/Daily Allowance
claims.
                       (These amendments shall be deemed to have come into force on 18
th
July 1994)
2.           The Government may, for reasons which should be recorded, order that any
officer or grade of officers shall be included in a grade higher or lower than
that prescribed in the above rule.
3.              An  officer in transit from one post to another ranks in the grade to which the
lower of the two posts would entitle him.
4.        The Travelling Allowance of an officer who is promoted or reverted with
retrospective effect, should not be revised in respect of the period interveningbetween the date of promotion or reversion, and that on which it is ordered.
               Government Decision No. 1
          
  † In all cases of belated grant of increments, other than those where such
increments have been specifically withheld under competent orders, wherethe class or grade of officers for drawal of T.A. has been changed consequent
on such belated grant of increments, the officers concerned will be eligible
to draw the  enhanced rate of T.A. with retrospective effect, i.e., from thedate on which the increment has actually fallen due.
               Government Decision No. 2
            
 #  In cases of belated issue of pay slips for ordinary increments, which do
not depend on the passing of tests, completion of probation, retrospective
202TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES
*[G O(P) No. 570/1975/Fin., Dated  22/12/1975]CHAP I ] [ RULES 4-5
confirmation, promotion, revision of pay scales, etc.,  but are delayed for
some routine reason or other, the officers concerned will be eligible to drawthe enhanced rate of T.A. with retrospective effect, i.e., from the date onwhich the increment has actually fallen due.  But such claims for arrears ofT.A will be paid by the Treasury Officers only after special audit by theAccountant General.
               Government Decision No. 3
             *It is clarified that the above Decision No. 2 is applicable to all cases of
belated issue of pay slips, when the delay in issue of pay slips is not dueto any fault of the officer, i.e., it is only when increments are delayed onaccount of specific orders of competent authorities that the benefitcontemplated in the above decision shall be denied.
S
ECTION   II
GENERAL
5.             The following  are the different kinds of Travelling  Allowances which may be
drawn in different circumstances by officers:-
               (a)   Permanent Travelling Allowance
               (b)  Conveyance Allowance
               (c)   Mileage Allowance
               (d)   Daily Allowance
               (e)   Actual Travelling Expenses.
               The Rules in this Chapter explain the nature of these allowances and the
method of calculating them.  The circumstances, in which they may bedrawn for particular journeys, are described in Chapters II to IV .
203*[G O(P) No. 36/1964/Fin., Dated  20/01/1964]
†[G O(Ms.) No. 370/1960/Fin., Dated 27/07/1960]
# [G O(P) No. 6/1968/Fin., Dated  04/01/1968]
![G O(P) No. 106/1970/Fin., Dated 07/02/1970]CHAP I ] [ RULES 5-5A KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
               Government Decision No. 1
              * The expressions ‘road mileage’ and ‘mileage allowance’ wherever they occur
shall be assigned meaning as referring to distance in kilometres.
               Government Decision No. 2
             †An Officer of Government required to attend meetings of the Board of
Directors or Committees of an Industrial Concern or a Bank or a Joint
Stock Company on behalf of  Government   shall  receive T.A. and D.A.
from Government according to rules.  The officer should credit the entireT.A. and sitting fee paid by the Industrial Concern or Bank to the receipt
head corresponding to the head of account to which his T.A. is debited.
He will also forward to the Accountant General in advance a statement ofT.A. and sitting fee to which he is entitled for attending such meetings in
a month so as to enable the Accountant General to watch recovery.  The
practice of crediting to Government the T.A. received from the Universityof Kerala according to its rules and receiving T.A. according to State
T.A. rules as laid down in G.O. (Ms.) 330/59/Fin., dated 29
th June 1959 will
be discontinued from 1st August 1960 in respect of Government officers
travelling on University business and instead they will be allowed to
receive T.A. direct from the University according to its rules.
5A.        # The right of a Government servant to Travelling Allowance including
daily allowance shall be forfeited or deemed to have been relinquished if
the claim for it is not preferred to the drawing officer or controlling officer
within one year from the date on which it fell due.
                !This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 12th
September 1967.
204TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES CHAP I ] [ RULE 6
SECTION  III
PERMANENT  TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCE
6.            A permanent monthly Travelling Allowance may be granted by Government
to any officer whose duties require him to travel extensively.  Such an
allowance is granted in lieu of all other forms of Travelling Allowance for
journeys within the officer’s sphere of duty and is drawn all the year round,whether the officer is absent from his headquarters or not.
               Government Decision No. 1
          Since Permanent Travelling Allowance is fixed at a monthly rate it is not
necessary that the officer should be on tour beyond 8 kilometres from
headquarters on all days of the month.  Even for days he is not on tour
outside 8 kilometres from headquarters he can draw Permanent TravellingAllowance.  This does not however mean that Permanent Travelling
Allowance can be drawn without leaving headquarters on any day of the
month.  The drawal of the allowance will be governed by the order fixing therate of Permanent Travelling Allowance and prescribing the terms and
conditions for  its drawal. For the drawal of full amount of Permanent Travelling
Allowance an officer should be on tour outside 8 kilometres from headquartersfor 15 days in a month and should spend at least 6 hours outside headquarters
on each such day.  If the minimum number of days of  travel is not performed
reduction has to be made as per the terms and conditions of the PermanentTravelling Allowance
            This decision shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 9
th
December 1970.
               Government Decision No. 2
                The following procedure will be followed for drawal of P.T.A in cases where
an officer is on duty for a  part of a month and also in cases where the officerhas been on duty for the whole month but has not toured for the minimum
number of days prescribed :-
205CHAP I ] [ RULES 6-7 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
           (a)  If an officer is on duty for a part of a month he will be allowed
proportionate P.T.A. for the days he is on duty provided that theofficer is on tour for the proportionate number of  days with  referenceto the minimum days of tour prescribed.
                  (b)    For every  day short toured, a deduction of  will  ( I x PTA) / Y be made
where Y is the minimum number of days of tour prescribed.
                     Example.-  Suppose an officer whose P.T.A. is ````` 40 per mensem, and
whose minimum period of touring is fixed as 20 days per  month, is onduty only for 20 days in a month of 30 days.  He is entitled to a P.T.A.of ````` (20 x 40)/30  = ````` 26.67 provided, he puts in not less than the
proportionate number of tour days, i.e., (20 x 20)/30 = 13 days.  Forevery day short toured by him a deduction of 1/20 of ` ` ` ` `  40 will be made
(i.e., if he tours only for 12 days, an amount of  ` ` ` ` ` 2 will be deducted
from ` ` ` ` `  26.67).
                (c)   In cases where the officer is on duty for the whole month but has not
toured for the minimum number of days prescribed, a deduction of   (Xx P.T.A) / Y  will be made  where  X and Y are the shortfall in the numberof days of tour and the minimum number of days of tour prescribed ina month respectively.
                           Example.- Suppose an officer whose P.T.A is ````` 40 per mensem and whose
minimum  number of tour days is fixed as 20 per month, is on duty for thewhole month and tours only for 15 days,  a deduction of 5 x 40/20  = ` ` ` ` `  10
is to be made from his P.T.A. of  ` ` ` ` ` 40 per mensem.
                         Effective from 8
th June 1962.
7.                A Permanent Travelling Allowance may not be drawn during leave, temporary
transfer or joining time, or unless in any case, it be otherwise expressly providedin these rules, during any period for which Travelling Allowance of any otherkind is drawn.
206TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES
*[Substitution C.S No.1/2002 GO(P) No. 252/2002/Fin., Dated 25/04/2002]CHAP I ] [ RULES 8-11
8.            When an of ficer  holds, either substantively or in an officiating capacity, two
or more posts to each of which a Permanent Travelling Allowance is attached,
he may be granted such Permanent Travelling Allowance, not exceeding the
total of all the allowances, as the Government may consider to be necessaryin order to cover the travelling expenses which he has to incur.
S
ECTION  IV
CONVEYANCE  ALLOWANCE
*9.          [The Government may grant, on such conditions as they think fit to impose,
a monthly conveyance allowance to any officer who is required to travel
extensively or within a specified area from his headquarters under conditionswhich do not render him eligible for daily allowance.
 *Note .- Every recommendation made to Government for the grant of a
conveyance allowance should contain detailed informationregarding the nature of the officers work, the approximate area of
the locality within which the conveyance is to be used and the
approximate average amount of travelling which the officer has toperform in a day.
*10.     Except as otherwise provided in these rules and unless the Government
otherwise direct, a conveyance allowance drawn all the year round, is notforfeited during absence from Headquarters and may be drawn in addition to
any other travelling allowance admissible under the rules provided that an
officer, who is in receipt of a conveyance allowance shall not draw mileageallowamce/ daily allowance for a journey within their specified area/
jurisdiction or within 8km, from time to time  on such condition as the
Government may prescribe.
*11.        A conveyance allowance shall not be drawn during leave or temporary
transfer/ holidays prefixed or suffixed to leave and during joining time.]
207*[G O(Ms.)No. 117/1964/Fin., Dated 16/03/1964]
† [G O(Rt.) No. 2723/1964/Fin., Dated  08/12/1964]CHAP I ] [ RULES 12-13 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
SECTION  V
MILEAGE  ALLOWANCE
SUB - S ECTION   I
General
12.          A mileage allowance is an allowance, calculated on the distance travelled
which is given to meet the cost of a particular journey.
13.(a)   For the purpose of calculating mileage allowance, a journey between two
places is held to have been performed by the shortest of two or more practicableroutes or by the cheapest of such routes as may be equally short; provided
that when there are alternative railway routes and the difference between
them in point of time and cost is not   great, mileage allowance may be calculatedon the route actually used.
    (b)   The shortest route is that by which a traveller can most speedily reach his
destination by the ordinary modes of travelling.  In case of doubt, the
Government will declare which shall be regarded as the shortest of two or
more routes.
               Government Decision No. 1
                 *The shortest distance between Ernakulam to Fort Cochin and Mattancherry
and vice versa would be the distance by road for purpose of Travelling
Allowance.
               Government Decision No. 2
          
  † The route via., Mavelikkara would be the shortest route for journeys
between Chengannur and Alleppey for purpose of Travelling Allowance.
         [This will have effect till bridges are opened in all three ferries in the
Changancherry route]
208TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES
@,*[G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated 29/03/1989]CHAP I ] [ RULES 13-14
               Government Decision No. 3
                @ In the case of air journeys from Trivandrum to Delhi via., Bombay the claim
should be supported by a certificate that no seat was available via., Madras.But the Chief Secretary to Government, Members of the Board of Revenue,Secretaries and Additional Secretaries to Government  and Heads ofDepartments are permitted to travel either via., Bombay or Madras for thejourneys to Delhi and back.
                 [Circular Memorandum No. 53/64/Fin., dated 6
th June 1964 and G.O. (P) No. 699/
64/Fin., dated 30th September 1964].
      (c)    If an officer travels by a route which is not the shortest but is cheaper than
the shortest, his mileage allowance should be calculated on the route actuallyused.
14.      The Government in respect of Heads of Departments and the Heads of
Departments in the case of their subordinates may, for special reasons which
should be recorded, permit mileage allowance to be calculated on a routeother than the shortest or cheapest,  provided that the journey is actuallyperformed by such route.
  *Note 1 .-The sanction of Government is not required for the claim for higher
road mileage by an officer of the First Grade for a journey performed byroad between places connected by rail or by air within the State.  Thesignature of the officer on the Travelling Allowance bill will be sufficientfor the purpose of this rule.  In such cases, the full rate of mileageallowance will be allowed upto 200 kilometres a day irrespective of thefact whether any inspection work is done or any public purpose isserved en-route and at three fourths of the full rate for the  remainingdistance.
209*[G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated 29/03/1989]
@ [Insertion G O(P) No. 391/2002/Fin., Dated 19/06/2002]
# [G O(P) No.16/1965/Fin., Dated 06/01/1965]CHAP I ] [ RULES 14-15 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
  *Note  2.- In cases where the distance to be travelled from the
Headquarters to  perform the duty at the outstation is within 50kilometres, the onward journey shall be performed on the day onwhich official business is to be transacted.  Similarly the returnjourney shall be performed on the day on which official business iscompleted at the outstation.
             *Effective from 1
st November 1979
    @Note 3 .- Whenever autorickshaws/taxies are used for official journeys from
residence or office to Airport/Railway Station/Bus Station and back,the autorickshaw/taxifare at the rates fixed by the Government fromtime to time shall be reimbursed.
          [This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force on the 22
nd
July 1987]
15.          # A journey on transfer is held to begin or end at the actual residence
of the Government servant concerned.  Any other journey (excluding ajourney of the type referred to in the note below) is held  to begin orend in any station  at the duty point in that station.
  Explanation.- For the purpose of this rule the  “duty point’’ at the
headquarters means the place or office where a Government servantremains on duty, i.e., the place or office of employment at theheadquarters.  In the case of outstations the “duty point” means theplace or office visited by the Government servant on duty.  Whetherthere are two or more such places or offices at an outstation, the
following shall be taken as the “duty point” :-
210TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES
*[G O(P) No. 216/1965/Fin., Dated  29/05/1965]
†[G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated 29/03/1989]CHAP I ] [ RULES 15-16
                 (a)    If a Government servant reaches that station by rail, steamer, or air, the
place or office which is farthest from the railway station, harbour (orjetty)  or the air booking centre as the case may be.
                (b)    If he reaches that station by road, the place or office which is farthest
from the point from which the journey to that station commenced.
   Note .- Where the journey commences or ends at a station which is either the
Government servant’s headquarters or his places of duty, it may betreated to have commenced or ended at his residence.
16.        *An Officer is required to travel by the class of accommodation for which
Travelling Allowance is admissible to him.  The provisions of all rulesregulating mileage allowance are subject to the condition  that if an officertravels in a lower class of accommodation, he shall be entitled to the fare ofthe class of accommodation actually used plus the incidental expenses
admissible  to his grade calculated on the distance travelled in the case of rail
journeys and the incidental expenses admissible had he travelled by theclass of accommodation by which he is entitled to travel in the case ofjourneys by sea or air.
  
† Note 1 .- Officers who are eligible to travel by first class or air conditioned
class and who actually travel by that class and claim the fareaccordingly, should furnish the following certificate in theirTravelling Allowance bills namely:-
  “Certified that I have actually travelled in the class of accommodation for
which the fare is claimed in this bill”;
   Effective  from 1
st November 1979.
211*[G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated 29/03/1989]CHAP I ] [ RULES 16-18 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
  *Note 2 .- Non Gazetted Officers who are eligible to travel by first class/air
conditioned class but who are not drawing officers, shall furnish thefollowing declaration in their tour diary, namely:-
               “ I hereby declare that I have actually travelled by first class/air conditioned
class on …….(dates) from …….. (place)  to ……….. (place)”.
                 On the basis of the above declaration furnished by the non gazetted officers,
the drawing officers shall furnish the following certificate in the TravellingAllowance bills of the nongazetted officers, namely:-
             “Certified that the officers for whom first class/air conditioned class railway
fare has been claimed in this bill have declared that they have actually travelledby that class of accommodation”;
                 Effective from 31
st March 1981.
17.       Mileage allowance is differently calculated as shown in the following
sections, according as the journey is or could be by railway, by sea, by
road or by air.
     SUB - S ECTION  II
Mileage  Allowance  for  Journeys  by  Railway
18.           For the purpose of calculating mileage allowance,  officers when travelling   by
railway are entitled to class of accommodation according to the followingscale:-
                   (a)    An Officer of the First Grade - Accommodation of the First Class (or the
highest class by whatever  name it is called).
                (b)    An officer of the Second Grade - Accommodation of the First Class.
                   (c)    
An officer of the Third Grade or the Fourth Grade - Accommodation
of the Second Class.
212TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES
!Insertion,† [GO(P) No. 391/2002/Fin., Dated  19/06/2002]
*[G O(P) No.117/1977/Fin., Dated 13/03/1977]
!, # [G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated 29/03/1989]CHAP I ] [ RULES 18-19
                          !(d)    All Third and Fourth Grade Officers will be entitled to travel in ‘Sleeper
 Class’ while on tour if the journey includes night journey also.
                   [This amendment  shall be deemed to have come into effect from 7th December
1994]
  Note 1 .- Air conditioned accommodation is not recognised as a class of
accommodation for the purpose of these rules except for journeys
on tour by officers holding  posts on a scale of pay the minimum  of
which is not less than † ````` 3000.  First Grade Officers holding posts
on a scale of pay the minimum of which is less than † ````` 3000 may
however travel by air conditioned accommodation while on tour
subject to the recovery of 13 paise per 10 kilometres or part thereofif it exceeds 5 kilometres, from their T.A. bills.  This rule is applicable
in the case of journeys by air conditioned class in Deluxe trains
also.
  
†[This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force on the 18th  July
1994].
  Note  2 .- Officers of the Second and Third Grades will be allowed to travel in
air con `ditioned second* class accommodation in Deluxe trains atpublic expense.
            *Effective  from 1
st March 1975.
  # Note 3 .-  [Deleted]
  Effective from 1st November , 1979.
19.       !The Government may, for special reasons which should be recorded,
declare any particular officer or class of officers to be entitled to
accommodation of a higher class than that prescribed for his class in
clauses (b) or  (c) of Rule 18.
213* [G O(P) No. 391/2002/Fin., Dated 19/06/2002]CHAP I ]  [ RULE 20 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
20.          Except in the case of journeys on transfer (the rules for which are contained
in section III), the mileage allowance admissible to  an officer is as follows:-
   *(a)   First Grade and Second Grade Officers who do not actually travel in First
Class/Air conditioned class and officers who are not eligible for First Class/
Air conditioned class of accommodation are entitled to mileage allowance at
the following rates:-
                 (i)      First Grade Officers                    -                36 paise per kilometre
                (ii)      Second Grade (a) Officers         -                28 paise per kilometre
               (iii)      Second Grade (b) Officers         -                28 paise per kilometre
               (iv)     Third Grade Officers                   -                24 paise per kilometre
                (v)      Fourth Grade Officers               -                20 paise per kilometre
           These rates are inclusive of incidental expenses and are applicable for
journeys irrespective of whether the places are connected by rail or not.
  *(b)  Officers who are eligible for First Class/Air conditioned class of
accommodation and  who actually perform the journey by such class areentitled to claim actual rail fare plus incidental expenses at the following
rates:
                 (i)      First Grade Officers                  -           12 paise per kilometre
                (ii)      Second Grade (a) Officers       -           10 paise per kilometre
               (iii)      Second Grade (b) Officers       -           10 paise per kilometre
               (iv)      Third Grade Officers                 -            6 paise per kilometre
                (v)      Fourth Grade Officers             -             5 paise per kilometre
               The above rates are subject to a minimum of half daily allowance.
                *[This shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1
st September
1995]
214TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES
* [G O(P) No.388/1975/Fin., Dated 27/08/1975]CHAP I ] [ RULE 20
               Government Decision No. 1
                * The Railway authorities entertain claims for refund of cancellation charges
on unused Railway tickets only from the passengers concerned.  So in casewhere the  official rail journey is cancelled solely due to official reasons, theGovernment servant should after getting the refund in the usual manner fromthe Railway station prefer to the appropriate Railway authority concerned hisclaim for refund of cancellation charges  (i.e., full ticket value excludingreservation charges and refund already  received) on unused tickets supportedby a certificate from his controlling authority to the effect that the journeyhad to be cancelled solely due to exigencies of service.  When the officerhimself is his own controlling officer for purposes of T.A. he may furnish hisown certificate.  The claim for the refund preferred on the Railways, should,however, be restricted to what it would be, had the officer booked and cancelledhis journey by the shortest route, save in exceptional cases, where the routeactually adopted by the officer is certified by the controlling officer or by theofficer himself if he is his own controlling officer for T.A. purposes to be inthe interest of public service.
          Reservation charges in cases referred to above will be reimbursed to the
Government servant without waiting for the acceptance of his claim for refundof cancellation charges by the Railway authorities.  The amount ofreservation fee reimbursed to a Government servant is debitable to the samehead to which his T.A. is charged.
               The Government servant should record a certificate as follows in the
T.A.  Bill for the claim.
             “Certified that the reservation of journey ticket made as per reservation
ticket No...... ................. on ......was cancelled due to exigencies of publicservice.”
215*, # [G O(P) No. 639/1983/Fin., Dated 06/10/1983]
† [G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated 29/03/1989]CHAP I ]  [ RULES 20-25 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
              *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from
the 6th  October 1983.
                Government Decision No. 2
          # The reservation charges paid for railway journeys in respect of the
appropriate classes of accommodation will be reimbursed to Governmentservants as forming part of the fare in cases where reservation is actuallyrequired in the exigencies of public service.
               This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from the
6
th  October 1983.
21.         [Deleted] †
22.         [Deleted] †
23.         [Deleted] †
              † Effective from 1st November 1979.
24.        If available, return tickets at reduced rates should always be purchased
when an officer expects to perform the return journey by rail within theperiod for which a return ticket is available.  The mileage allowance forthe forward and the return journeys wherever such return tickets areavailable and are purchased will be the actual cost  of the return ticketplus the usual allowance admissible for incidental expenses each way.
 SUB-SECTION   III
Mileage Allowace for Journeys by Sea in a Steamer
25.            For the purpose of calculating mileage allowance, officers are entitled to class
of  accommodation according to the following scale :-
216TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES
26.          Except in the case of journeys on transfer the mileage allowance admissible
to an officer is single fare of the class of accommodation he is entitled to plusthe Daily Allowance admissible under the rules for halts outside the State or1 and 3/5 fare whichever is greater.  In cases where the steamer company hastwo rates of fare, one inclusive and one exclusive of diet, the word ‘fare’ inthis rule should be held to mean fare exclusive of diet.
27.       In cases of doubt or in which, owing to the arrangement of classes on a
steamer, the provisions of Rule 25 if strictly construed involve hardship,Government may decide, for journeys generally or for particular journeys, towhat class of accommodation  an officer is entitled, and whether if aconcession is sanctioned, he should be granted the full allowance admissiblefor the higher class in which he is permitted to travel.
28.         The rules in this sub-section apply to officers who cross a river or arm of the
sea by steamer in the course of a journey unless such crossing occurs duringa railway journey and the charge for it is included in the railway fare.  In thelatter case, the crossing is treated as part of the railway journey.
29.           If suitable accommodation on a Government vessel is offered to an officer, he
is entitled to Travelling Allowance under Rule 109 and not to mileage allowance.CHAP I ] [ RULES 25-29
               (a)   An Officer of the First Grade
               (b)   An Officer of the Second Grade
       (c)   An Officer of the Third  Grade
           (d)   An officer of the Fourth GradeHighest class
If there be two classes only on the
steamer the higher class, and if therebe more than two classes, middle orsecond class.
If there be two classes only on the
steamer the lower class, if there be threeclasses, middle class, or second classand if there be four classes, third class.
Lowest class
217                 (i)   Officers of the First Grade
                   (ii)    Officers of the Second Grade
               (iii)   Officers of the Third Grade
               (iv)   Officers of the Fourth Grade:
:36 paise per kilometre if the
journey is performed by public
conveyance.
28 paise per kilometre
: 24 paise per kilometre
: 20 paise per kilometre
*[G O(P) No. 391/2002/Fin., Dated 19/06/2002]CHAP I ] [ RULES 29-31 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
It is not open to him to refuse to accept such accommodation and to draw
mileage allowance.
 SUB-SECTION   IV
Mileage  Allowance  For  Journeys  By  Road
30.          For the purpose of these rules travelling by road includes travelling by sea or
river in a steam launch or in any vessel other than a steamer and travelling bycanal.
31.          * For journeys by road, mileage allowance is admissible at the following rates for
each kilometre travelled irrespective of whether the places are connected by railor not :
                [This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1
st
September 1995].
              *Second paragraph: omitted                [This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1
st
December 1989].
              † For journeys by public conveyance by road, officers will be paid actual
bus fare plus incidental expenses as admissible under Para 1 of Rule 110.
†[G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated 29/03/1989]
218TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES CHAP I ] [ RULE 31
Grade I and II Officers will be entitled to travel by Express bus and Grade
III and IV Officers by Fast Passenger bus.  In emergent cases,  with the
permission of the Controlling Officers, Grade III and IV Officers can
perform journeys in Express buses and claim Travelling Allowance onthat basis.  The existing provision  for claiming road mileage for journeys
by rail or road, irrespective of whether the places are connected by rail or
not, will continue.
                Effective from 1
st September, 1985.
  Note 1 .-  With effect from 1st November 1979, only officers of the First Grade
are allowed to travel by special conveyance and claim higher mileage.
With effect from 1st September, 1985 First  Grade Officers in receipt of
actual pay of ````` 2250  and above only are allowed to travel by special
conveyance and claim higher mileage.  An officer of the First Grade
claiming the higher mileage will note in his Travelling Allowance billconcerned the registration number of the special conveyance used by
him.
  Note 2 .- Officers of the First Grade claiming mileage at the higher rate shall
furnish the following certificate in their Travelling Allowance bills,
namely :-
             “I certify that I did not perform the road journeys for which mileage
allowance has been claimed at the higher rate by any publicconveyance which plies regularly for hire between fixed points and
charge fixed rates.  I also certify that the journey was not performed
in any other vehicle without payment of its hire charges or withoutincurring its running charges.”
  Note 3 .-  An officer of the First Grade claiming higher road mileage for a
journey performed in his own car shall furnish the following certificatein lieu of the certificate referred to in Note 2 above, namely:-
219CHAP I ] [ RULE 31 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
  “I certify that the road journeys for which mileage has been claimed at the
higher rate were performed by me in my own car”.
  Note 4 .- All officers claiming road mileage should record in their Travelling
Allowance bills one of the following certificates as may be appropriate,namely :-
 (a)  “Certified that I have not been provided with any Government
conveyance for my use”.
Or
 (b)   “Certified that the Government conveyance provided for my use
was out of order/not available for journeys on ….(dates to bespecified).”
  Explanation .- In the case of non-gazetted officers, the drawing officers shall
record the certificate with suitable changes and the controlling officershall ensure that the Government servants who are provided withGovernment conveyance use such conveyance for their official journeysand that otherwise, the prescribed certificate is recorded invariably.
  Note  5 .- When two or more officers travel in a conveyance belonging to one
of them or hired by one of them,  the officer who owns or hires theconveyance may draw Travelling Allowance as if he travelled aloneand the other officer (s) may draw only the Travelling Allowance asadmissible under Rule 107 read with Rule 110, even if he (they) meets(meet) a portion of the cost of propulsion of the conveyance or of thehire charges of the conveyance, as the case may be.  A certificate in thefollowing form shall also be attached to the Travelling Allowance billsof the officers claiming travelling  allowance  under the above provision,namely:-
220*[G O(MS) No. 454/1961/Fin., Dated 06/11/1961]TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES CHAP I ] [ RULE 31
            “Certified that I/We
            (1)   Name and Designation ………………………………….
            (2)   Name and designation …………………………………
            (3)   Name and designation …………………………………
 (4)   Name and designation travelled together from ………
………to ……………… on …………………………… in a specialconveyance (here enter Registration No. of the vehicle) owned/hired by the officer whose name is mentioned as No………. above,and that I have claimed Travelling Allowance admissible underNote 5 below Rule 31, Kerala Service Rules, Part II.”
   Note 6 .-  An Officer who performs a journey by a conveyance owned by
another officer without meeting the cost of its use and propulsion butwhose own conveyance immediately precedes or follows him is  eligiblefor the mileage allowance admissible under the rules.  He shall, whenhe claims mileage allowance certify that the cost of the use andpropulsion of his conveyance which immediately preceded or followedthe conveyance by which he travelled was met by him.
  Note 7 .-If an Officer of the First Grade, travels more than two hundred
kilometres a day by special conveyance, the rate of mileage admissiblefor the excess over two hundred kilometres will be reduced to threefourths of what is normally admissible.
               Government Decision No. 1
               *If an Officer has to perform long journeys, he may be allowed to perform the
journeys in more than one day subject to the condition that the halt shouldbe  made only after the officer has made a march of not less than two hundredkilometres in aday.  In cases where the journey commences late in the day,
221†[G O(Ms) No. 486/1961/Fin., Dated 02/12/1961]CHAP I ] [ RULE 31 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
halts may also be made after marches of less than two hundred kilometres.  In
all such cases of long journeys the  restriction regarding the mileage in theabove note will be applied only inrespect of each day’s journey.  No dailyallowance either full or half will be admissible to the Officer for suchintermediate halts.
              Government Decision No. 2
           
   †Effective from 1st  November, 1959.
  Note 8 .- For journeys performed by foot between places not connected by
any public conveyance, Officers of the First Grade shall be given mileageat the rate applicable for journeys by special conveyance and officersof the other grades shall be given mileage at the rate of 35 paise perkilometre.  An Officer claiming mileage in such cases should certifythat he performed the journey entirely by walking, and the officer who
countersigns the Travelling Allowance bill shall countersign the above
certificate also.
  Note 9. - A First Grade Officer, with a staff car attached to him or his office
should not engage a special conveyance for his journeys, if the staffcar is available. The following procedure should be observed ifsuch an Officer claims higher mileage in his Travelling Allowancebills namely:-
   (i)     If the bill requires countersignature,   the countersigning authority
shall countersign it only after satisfying himself that thedepartmental vehicle was not available for the journey and shallrecord a certificate to that effect in the bill.
  (ii)    If the bill does not require countersignature, a certificate should
be attached to the bill signed by the head of the Office or the
222**[Circular No. 43959/EB4/Fin., Dated 19/11/1962]TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES
*[G O(P) No. 756/1978/Fin., Dated 16/10/1978]CHAP I ] [ RULE 31
Officer-in-charge of the departmental vehicle to the effect that the
vehicle was not available for the journey for which special mileageis claimed.
  Note 10 .- Autorickshaws, Motor Cycles, Scooters and Mopeds will not
be considered as special conveyances, and no higher rate of mileagewill be allowed for journeys performed by such vehicle.
          With effect from 1
st September, 1985 Grade I and Grade II Officers are
entitled for special mileage allowance at the rate of 30 paise per kilometrefor journeys for public purpose by motor cycle or Scooter owned  andmaintained by them.  As in the case of special mileage for car, theregistration number of the Motor cycle or Scooter  should be recorded
in the bill claiming T.A., at the special rate allowed for such journeys.
               Government Decision No. 3
             *Half daily allowance will be admissible for intermediate halts beyond 200
kilometres when the journey is performed in departmental vehicles.
               Government Decision No. 4
               **The above note should be deemed to apply only to journeys performed by
road. ‘The nature of conveyance’ referred to in the note is intended todifferentiate  between ‘Public conveyance’ and ‘Special conveyance’ and notbetween  different modes of journeys, such as journey by road or journey byrail. The note above therefore allows higher mileage only for journeys ontransfer between places not connected by rail.
               Rule 66, Part II, does not permit an officer to draw road mileage for journeys
on transfer performed between places connected by rail as the term “Mileageallowance” as defined in Rule 12, Part II, relates not to ‘road mileage’ alone.
223† [G O(P) No. 197/1966/Fin., Dated 11/05/1966]CHAP I ] [ RULES 32-34 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
32.          The Government may, for special reasons to be recorded, allow to a particular
officer or grade of officers, mileage allowance at a higher  rate than is prescribed
in Rule 31.
33.      In calculating mileage allowance for journeys by road, fractions of a
kilometre should be omitted from the total of a bill for any one journey
but not from the various items which make up the bill.
        SUB - S ECTION   V
Mileage  Allowance  for  Journeys  by  Air.
34.         † An officer authorised to travel by air is entitled to mileage allowance equal
to one standard air fare plus an allowance for incidental expenses at one-fifthof the standard air fare subject to a minimum of one daily  allowance and
maximum of five times the daily allowance at the ordinary rate for each single
journey, each single journey being defined as the journey from starting pointto destination or vice versa.
  Note 1 .- All first grade officers are authorised to travel by plane, Officers
belonging to the other grades should take the prior sanction ofGovernment for air journeys. Provided that one member  of the personal
Staff of Ministers, irrespective of the grade, shall be entitled to travel
by air to accompany the Minister in case of necessity.
  *(This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force from 1
st December
1990)
  # Note 2 .-  When an officer performs both rail and air journeys on the same
day he will be allowed to draw the actual incidental expenses at the
prescribed rates subject to a minimum of one daily allowance for both
the air  and rail journeys together.
*[G O(P) No. 391/2002/Fin., Dated 19/06/2002]
# [G O(P) No. 416/1966/Fin., Dated 13/09/1966]
224TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES
# [G O(P) No. 16/1964/Fin., Dated  09/01/1964]CHAP I ] [ RULE 34
  Note 3 .- The incidental expenses are limited to the following ceiling:-
             (i)   First Grade Officers                       *`````  85
            (ii)   Second  Grade (a) Officers-        * `````  60
           (iii)   Second Grade (b) Officers           *`````  45
           (iv)  Third Grade Officers                    *`````  35
            (v)   Fourth Grade Officers                  *`````  30
              *[This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect
from1st September 1995.]
               Government Decision No. 1
              # The following classification is prescribed in respect of various officers for
purposes of air travel while performing official duty journeys, where twoclasses of tickets are available :-
*[G O(P) No. 391/2002/Fin., Dated 19/06/2002]Class of Officers
                 (i)   Officers drawing a pay of ````` 2,250  per
month and above.
         (ii) Officers drawing a pay between
````` 1,800 and ````` 2,249 per month
           (iii) Officers other than those falling
under (i) and (ii) aboveClass of air travel
Standard (First) Class
Standard (First) class where the
journey involves night travel;
otherwise Tourist Class.
For this purpose ‘Night’ means
the time between 6 p.m. and 6 a.m.
In case part of the journey is
performed during night, standard
(First) class will be admissible for
the entire journey.
Tourist class.
225                Government Decision No. 2
                * The Chairman and Members of the Kerala Public Service Commission will
be included along with officers of a pay of ` ` ` ` `  2,250 per mensem and above
for purposes of air travel.
               Government Decision No. 3
             † The taxes paid on inland and foreign air travels shall be reimbursed to the
State Government servants, in cases where the travel is on official businessand on public interest and where the expenditure on air fare itself is borne bythe Government, Officers may claim reimbursement of the tax paid by them inthe Travelling Allowance bills prepared for the particular journeys producingreceipts in token of having paid the tax.  The reimbursement of the tax will beby debit to the same head of account to which the Travelling Allowanceclaims of the officers are debited.
             This decision shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 15
th
November 1971 and 15th October 1971 respectively, for inland air travel tax
and foreign air travel tax.
               Government Decision No. 4
          **The Governor,  Speaker, Deputy Speaker, Leader of the Opposition,
Ministers, Chief Secretary, Secretaries to Government and the followingHeads of Departments will be covered by Personal Accident InsurancePolicies on year to year basis.
               1.    Member,  Board of Revenue.
               2.    Chief Engineer.
               3.    Director of Health Services.
*[G O(Ms.) No. 586/1964/Fin., Dated 19/08/1964]
†[G O(P) No. 46/1973/Fin., Dated 12/02/1973]CHAP I ] [ RULE 34 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
** [G O(P) No. 531/1980/Fin., Dated 29/08/1980]
226*[G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated 29/03/1989]TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES
               4.    Director of Public Instruction.
               5.    Member, Planning Board.
               6.    Director of Technical Education.
               7.    Director of Collegiate Education.
               8.    Chief Electrical Inspector.
               9.    Director of Ports.
              10.   Chief Town Planner.
              11.   Inspector General of Police.
                 In respect  of others who travel by air on Government business they will take
Air Insurance Coupons from Air Port (Rupees ten for a compensation ofRupees one lakh).  This amount will be reimbursed to them along with theT.A. claims.
35.          An Officer who is not authorised to travel by air but who performs a
journey by air on tour can draw only the Travelling Allowance towhich he would have been entitled if he had travelled by rail, road orsteamer.
36.        If available, return tickets at reduced rates should always be purchased
when an officer expects to perform the return journey by air within theperiod during which a  return ticket is available.  The mileage allowancefor the forward and the return journeys when such return tickets areavailable will, however, be the actual cost of the return ticket plus 2/5 ofthe standard air fare for a single journey between the two places.
  * Note .- The incidental expenses for each single journey will be limited to the
ceilings prescribed in note 3 under rule 34.CHAP I ] [ RULES 34-36
227* [G O(P) No. 141/1977/Fin., Dated 10/05/1977]CHAP I ] [ RULES 36-39 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
               Government Decision
            * The cancellation charges of air tickets shall be reimbursed to officers
who have booked their tickets for official journeys in case they could notundertake the journeys due to circumstances beyond their control.
                The Government servant should record a certificate as follows in the T.A. Bill
for the claim.  Certified that reservation of journey ticket made as per
reservation ticket No........... on................was cancelled due to exigencies of
public  service.
S
ECTION  VI
DAILY  ALLOWANCE
37.      A daily allowance is a uniform allowance for each day of absence from
headquarters, which is intended to cover the ordinary  daily charge incurred
by an officer in consequence of such absence.
38.         Unless in any case it be otherwise expressly provided in these rules, a daily
allowance may be drawn while on tour by every officer whose duties requirethat he should travel, and may not be drawn except while on tour.
39.         Daily allowance is admissible on the following scale :-
                (i)   Officers of the First Grade                      † ````` 70 a day
               (ii)   Officers of the Second Grade (a)           † ````` 55 a day
              (iii)   Officers of the Second  Grade (b)          † ````` 40 a day
              (iv)   Officers of the Third Grade            † ````` 35 a day
               (v)   Officers of the Fourth Grade            † ````` 25 a day
             
 † [This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect
from 1st September  1995]
† [G O(P) No. 391/2002/Fin., Dated 19/06/2002]
228TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES
* [G O(P) No. 426/1966/Fin., Dated 17/09/1966]CHAP I ] [ RULES 39-41
             *Provided that an officer, who while on tour is provided with free boarding
and lodging, may draw only one fourth of the daily allowance admissible tohim at the station concerned; if only boarding is provided free to such anofficer he may draw daily allowance at one-half of the admissible rate; if onlylodging is provided free, he may draw daily allowance at two-thirds of theadmissible rate.
   Note 1 .-  Daily Allowance is calculated on the actual pay the officers are in
receipt of, and with reference  to the grade  to which they belong.
   
*Note 2 .- If a Government servant who stays during tours in circuit houses,
inspection bungalows, rest houses, etc., is required to pay any chargeson account of stay at such places, even though it may not cover theentire cost of the facilities provided, no reduction in the daily allowancewill be made.
40.          The Government may, for reasons which should be recorded and on such
conditions as they may think fit to impose, sanction for any officer orclass of officers, a daily allowance higher or lower than that prescribed inRule 39, if they consider that the allowance so prescribed is inadequateor excessive.
S
ECTION  VII
 ACTUAL  EXPENSES
41.           Unless in any case it be otherwise expressly provided in these rules, no officer
is entitled to be provided with means of conveyance by or at the expense ofGovernment, or to draw as Travelling Allowance the actual cost or part of theactual cost of travelling.
229CHAP II ] [ RULES 42-43 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
CHAPTER II
TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCE  FOR  DIFFERENT
KINDS  OF  JOURNEY
SECTION  I
 GENERAL
42.      The Travelling Allowance admissible to an officer for any journey is
calculated with reference to the purpose of the journey in accordancewith the rules laid down in Sections II to XI of this Chapter.
  Note 1 .-  When an officer who is permitted on his own request to attend
meetings or conferences or congresses held in India and if anyGovernment interest is served thereby, he may be paid (under specificorders of Government) a single railway fare of the class ofaccommodation to which he is entitled under these rules for the journeyeach way, without any road mileage or daily allowance for halt, at theplace of meeting.
   Travelling and daily allowances under these rules, are however, admissible
when an officer is officially   sent to attend  a conference, congress ormeeting.
  Note 2 .-  The officers of Government travelling on University business will
receive Travelling Allowance direct from the University according toits rules.
  Note 3 .-  An officer as a member of a Staff Council shall be eligible for Travelling
Allowance  and Daily Allowance as on  tour for the journeys performedby him for attending  the Staff Council Meeting and back.
43.            Unless in any case it be otherwise expressly provided in these rules, an officer
making a journey for any purpose is not entitled to recover from Governmentthe cost of transporting his family or his personal luggage, conveyances andcamp equipage.
230* [G O(Rt.) No. 787/1961/DD., Dated 09/10/1961]TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES CHAP II ] [ RULE 44
44.            The Government may, by general or special order, direct that the ordinary
rates of daily allowance or mileage allowance or both shall be increasedeither in a definite ratio or in any other suitable manner for any or allofficers travelling in any specified locality in which travelling is unusuallyexpensive.
  Note 1 .-When travelling in hilly tracts, officers are entitled to draw an additional
25 per cent of the daily allowance or mileage allowance ordinarilyadmissible to them in Class I  tracts and 12 ½  per cent   thereof in ClassII tracts.   Appendix  IX gives the list of Class I and Class II hilly tracts.
               Ruling No. 1
               A Government servant whose headquarters is situated in a special tract and
who undertakes a journey from headquarters and returns thereto on the sameday, is not entitled to the higher rate of daily allowance applicable for halts inthe special tract irrespective of whether the journey is performed entirely inthe special tract or partly in the special and partly in the ordinary tract.
               Ruling No. 2
            A Government servant whose headquarters is situated in a hilly tract may
claim half daily allowance admissible under Rule 63 for the day of arrival atand for the day of departure from  a place in Class  I or II hilly tract at theenhanced rates applicable to the class of the hilly tract where he halted,provided his absence from the headquarters exceeded eight hours.
                This ruling shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 20
th July
1960.
               Ruling No. 3
                  *The area between Dehra Dun and Mussorie in Uttar Pradesh will be treated
as Class I hilly tract for purposes of Note 1 to Rule 44, Part II, K.S.R.
231CHAP II ] [ RULES 44-46 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
  Note 2 .- The rate of daily allowance of an officer who spends part of a day in
a hilly tract and part in a place to which the ordinary rates apply is
determined according to the place where he halts after the journey.
   Note 3 .- Officers travelling or halting outside the State may be given daily
allowance at the following  rates :-
             (i)  Officers of the First Grade                     † ````` 100 a day
            (ii)  Officers of the Second Grade (a)          † ````` 70 a day
           (iii)  Officers of the Second Grade (b)         † ````` 60 a day
           (iv)  Officers of the Third Grade                  † ````` 55 a day
           (v)   Officers of the Fourth Grade                † ````` 35 a day
  †(This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from
1st September 1995.)
45.         When an officer of a grade lower than the first grade is required by the order
of a superior authority  to travel by special means of conveyance, the cost ofwhich exceeds the amount of the daily allowance or mileage allowance,
admissible to him under the ordinary rules he may draw the actual cost of
travelling in lieu of such daily or mileage allowance.  The bill for the actualcost must be supported by a certificate, signed by the superior authority and
countersigned by the controlling officer, stating that the use of the special
means of conveyance was absolutely necessary and specifying thecircumstances which rendered it necessary.
S
ECTION  II
JOURNEYS ON TOUR
SUB-SECTION   I
General Rules
46.       The headquarters of an officer shall be in such place as Government may
prescribe.
†[G O(P) No. 391/2002/Fin., Dated  19/06/2002]
232†[G O(P) No. 454/1980/Fin., Dated 16/07/1980]
# [G O(Ms.) No. 157/Rev., Dated 14/02/1962]
* [G O(P) No. 440/1967/Fin., Dated  05/10/1967]TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES CHAP II ] [ RULES 47-49
47.        The Government may define the limits of the sphere of duty of any officer.
  †Note 1 .- The Heads of Departments and District Collectors are empowered
to sanction journeys of subordinate officers to the adjoining districtsof neighbouring States.
            Effective from 30
th August 1979.
  Note 2 .- The Heads of Departments and District Collectors will be competent
to undertake journeys outside the State in the adjoining districts ofneighbouring States in public interest.
 # Note 3 .- The Board of Revenue is empowered to sanction journeys of
Potdars outside the State accompanying remittances to the ReserveBank of India agencies in accordance with instructions from theCurrency Officer.
         Effective from 14
th February 1962.
  Note 4 .- The Inspector-General of Police is empowered to sanction the journeys
outside the State of all officers of his department below the rank ofAssistant Superintendent of Police/Deputy Superintendent of Police.*He is also empowered to sanction journeys outside the State of allofficers below the rank of Superintendent of Police in the Crime Branchin connection with investigation of cases.
48.           An officer is on tour when absent on duty from his headquarters either within
or, with proper sanction beyond his sphere of duty.
49.         In case of doubt the Government may decide whether particular absence is
absence on duty for the purpose of Rule 48.
233CHAP II ] [ RULES 50-53 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
50.        The Government may impose such restrictions as it may think fit, upon the
frequency and duration of journeys to be made on tour by any officer or
class of officers.
51.           If the Government declares that the pay of a particular officer or class of
officers has been so fixed as to compensate for the cost of all journeys,
other than journeys by rail or steamer, within the officer’s sphere of duty,such an officer may draw no Travelling Allowance for such journeys
though he may draw mileage allowance, for journey by rail or steamer.
When travelling on duty, with proper sanction beyond his sphere ofduty, he may draw Travelling Allowance calculated under the ordinary
rules for the entire journeys, including such part of it as is within his
sphere of duty.
52.        The Travelling Allowance drawn by an officer on tour ordinarily takes the
shape of either Permanent Travelling Allowance or daily allowance, if either
of these is admissible to him.  Permanent Travelling Allowance and dailyallowance may, however, in certain circumstances, be exchanged for mileage
allowance or for the whole or part of the actual cost of travelling.  In certain
other circumstances, actual cost may be drawn in addition to daily allowance
or for journeys for which no daily  allowances is admissible.
S
UB-SECTION   II
Officers in Receipt of Permanent
Travelling  Allowance
53.           A Permanent Travelling Allowance is intended to cover the cost of all journeys
within the sphere of duty of the officer who draws it, and such an officer may
not draw any other Travelling Allowance in place of or  in addition to Permanent
Travelling Allowance for such journeys provided that:
               (1)   a class of officers to whom Government may extend this concession
may draw, in addition to Permanent Travelling Allowance single fare
for a journey by rail, and
234TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES CHAP II ] [ RULES 53-54
             (2)   the Government may, by general or special order, permit an officer
whose sphere of duty extends beyond the limits of a single districtto draw, in addition to Permanent Travelling Allowance, whenever
his actual travelling expenses for  a duly authorised journey by
public conveyance exceed double the  amount of his PermanentTravelling Allowance for the period occupied in such journey, the
difference between such double Permanent Travelling Allowance
and the mileage allowance calculated for the journey.
54.           When an officer in receipt of Permanent Travelling Allowance travels on duty,
with proper sanction, beyond his sphere of duty,  he may exchange his
Permanent Travelling Allowance for the mileage allowance for the entire
journey including such part of it as is within his sphere of duty and may drawin addition Permanent Travelling Allowance for any day of his absence for
which he doesnot draw mileage allowance.  This rule does not apply to an
officer who travels beyond his sphere of duty in the course of a journey from
one place within that sphere to another such place, or to an officer who
makes, by road alone, a journey not exceeding 32 kilometres.
  Note.-  All officers in receipt of Permanent Travelling Allowance will be allowed
to exchange Permanent Travelling Allowance for regular Daily
Allowance for days of halt at places outside the area of jurisdiction for
the performance of official duty at such places under specific orders ofcompetent authority subject to the normal rules for the drawal of Daily
Allowance.
                          The above benefit will also be extended to officers who are in receipt of
Permanent Travelling Allowance and who are deputed for training at an
outstation beyond their area of jurisdiction.
                      The amendment in the first paragraph shall be deemed, to have come
into force with effect from December 15, 1970 and that in the secondpara from January 15, 1971.
235CHAP II ] [ RULES 54-56 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
                Government Decision.
              *Deduction of proportionate Permanent  Travelling Allowance for the day
on which Permanent  Travelling Allowance is exchanged for mileage allowance
will be made in accordance with the formula specified below.
If ‘X’ is the number of days of tour performed in a month (i.e., including
the days for which Permanent Travelling Allowance is exchanged for
mileage) and ‘Y’ the number of days on tour for which Permanent
Travelling Allowance is exchanged for mileage,  Permanent TravellingAllowance to be deducted will be  Y/X x PTA admissible  for the month
for ‘X’ days of tour.
(Permanent Travelling Allowance admissible for  ‘X’ days has to be calculated
in accordance with the Decision No. 2 under Rule 6, Kerala Service Rules,
Part II.)
  S
UB-SECTION   III
   Officers Not In Receipt Of Permanent
Travelling   Allowance
 SUB DIVISION   I
 Daily Allowance
55.         Except where otherwise expressly provided in these rules, an officer not in
receipt of Permanent Travelling Allowance draws Travelling Allowance for
journeys on tour in the shape of daily allowance.
56.            Daily allowance may not be drawn except during absence from headquarters
on duty.  A period of absence from headquarters begins  when an officeractually leaves his headquarters and ends when he actually returns to the
place in which his headquarters are situated whether he halts there or not.
  Note .- If an officer of a vacation department combines tour with vacation i.e.
proceeds on tour and avails of vacation without returning to his
*[G O(P) No. 370/1967/Fin., Dated 18/08/1967]
236*[G O(P) No. 405/1965/Fin., Dated  18/10/1965]
†[G O(P) No. 16/1965/Fin., Dated  06/01/1965]
# [Circular Memo No. 92/1964/EB4/Fin., Dated  24/10/1964  and
G O(P) No. 129/1965/Fin., Dated 08/04/1965]TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES CHAP II ] [ RULES 56-57
headquarters, he should be granted tour Travelling Allowance under
these rules for the onward journey only.
             Ruling
                *When two journeys are performed within a period of 24 hours, the period of
absence from headquarters will be treated as one day irrespective of the factthat the journey was performed on two calendar days and the drawal of dailyallowance will be regulated accordingly.
57.      
  †Daily allowance may not be drawn for any day on which a Government
servant does not reach a point outside a radius of eight kilometres fromthe duty point (i.e. the place or office of employment) at his headquartersor return to it from a similar point.
  Note 1 .- The term ‘radius of eight kilometres’ means a distance of eight
kilometres by the shortest route by which a person can reach his
destination by the ordinary modes of travel.
            
  Government Decision
           # In the case of an Officer having his headquarters at Ernakulam, no daily
allowance is admissible for journey to Mattancherry/Fort Cochin and viceversa, as he does not reach a point outside the radius of 8 Kms. This takeseffect from 16
th March 1964.
  Note 2 .- The Malabar Special Police and the District Armed Reserve Personnel
stationed at Malappuram who have to halt for a period of ten days atMelmuri Rifle Range situated within eight kilometres from Malappuram
237CHAP II ] [ RULES 57-58 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
in connection with the annual firing course there, shall be exempted
from the operation of the above rule.
  * Note 3 .-  Civilian staff of N.C.C. Department attending N.C.C. Camps within
a radius of eight kilometres from their headquarters shall be exempted
from the operation of the above rule.
        This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect
from 1st April 1960.
58.         Subject to the conditions laid down in Rules 59 and 60, daily allowance may
be drawn during a halt on tour or on a holiday occurring during a tour.
   Note 1 .-   An officer who takes casual leave while on tour is not entitled to
draw daily allowance during such leave.
   Note 2 .-   Daily allowance is not admissible for any day, whether Sunday or
holiday, unless the officer is actually and not merely constructively in
camp.
  †Note 3 .- In the case of enforced halt occurring en route on tour journeys
necessitated by break down of communication due to blockade of roads
and railways on account of floods, rains, landslides and other acts of
God or delayed journeys or cancellations of schedules of motorconveyances, trains or air crafts, such periods of halts shall be treated
as duty and the Government servant granted daily allowance at three-
fourths of the rate applicable to him at the station in which the enforcedhalt takes place for the entire period of enforced halt after excluding the
first day of such halt for which no daily allowance shall be allowed.
Government in the Administrative Department in respect of Heads ofDepartments and the Heads of Departments in the case of their
* [G O(P) No. 248/1980/Fin., Dated 17/04/1980]
† [G O(P) No. 254/1967/Fin., Dated  29/06/1967]
238* [G O(P)No. 254/1967/Fin., Dated 29/06/1967]TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES CHAP II ] [ RULES 58-59
subordinate officers will be the authority competent to declare the
periods of enforced halts as duty.
  Note  4 .-  In respect of journeys involving an overnight halt at an intermediate
station either due to non-availability of connecting service or due to
the cancellation of connecting air service, half daily allowance will be
allowed at the rate applicable to the intermediate station for eachovernight halt (in addition to the allowance for incidental expenses
admissible for air journeys) if the Indian Airlines Corporation does not
provide at its expense any facility for boarding and lodging.  Half DailyAllowance will also be given for similar enforced halts occurring
between air and  rail/road journeys on duty.
           The above amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with
effect from 24
th December, 1970.
  *Note  5 .-  No daily allowance is admissible to a Government servant for the
day on which he avails himself of a restricted holiday while on tour.
59.         A daily allowance may not be drawn for more than ten days of a halt at one
place.  But Heads of Departments in the case of their subordinates and the
Government in the case of Heads of Departments, may grant exemption from
the operation of this rule where they are satisfied :-
                  (a)     that prolonged halts are necessary in the interest of the public service, and
              (b)   that such halts necessitate the maintenance of camp equipage, or
where no camp equipage is maintained entail extra expense on the
officer after the first ten days.
                        In such cases the daily allowance admissible will be -
                        (a)    full rate for the first ten days;
                        (b)    three-fourth rate for the next 20 days; and
                        (c)    half-rate thereafter.
239CHAP II ] [ RULE 59 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
               But no allowance will be given for halts exceeding three months.
  ^,*Note 1 .- Officers deputed for training to Trivandrum, Ernakulam,
Kozhikkode, and city outside the state of Kerala shall be paid dailyallowance at full rate for the first 30 days and at ¾  of the rate for the
next 60 days, in relaxation of the restriction imposed in the above rule.
  
         † This Rule shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st
August, 1982.
  # Explanation.- This note shall apply to the officers deputed for training
to Delhi, Bombay and Calcutta with effect from the 1st December, 1978
and to those deputed for training to other cities outside the State witheffect from 10
th July 1979.
  Note  2 .-  Periods of absence on leave (including casual leave) will be included
in computing the limits prescribed in this rule.
  Exception.- The Circle Commander, No. 11 Circle Cadet Corps, Trivandrum
will be competent to sanction Daily Allowance under the above
rule, to the civilian staff of the establishment of the National CadetCorps deputed for duty to camps.
             This exception shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from
20
th October 1962.
               Ruling No. 1
               The sanction of competent authority for admitting daily allowance in excess
of ten days would be necessary only when the number of full daily allowances
* [G O(P) No. 837/1978/Fin., Dated  01/12/1978]
^ [G O(P) No. 1027/1979/Fin., Dated 23/11/1979]
† [G O(P) No. 416/1983/Fin., Dated 20/07/1983]
# [G O(P) No. 588/1980/Fin., Dated 11/09/1980]
240TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES CHAP II ] [ RULES 59-61
drawn inclusive of the half daily allowance under Rule 63 exceeds ten; but the
daily or half daily allowances, if any, admissible for the days of travel covered
by Rule 60 (c) should be excluded in calculating the daily allowances.
               Ruling No. 2
           Daily allowance will be allowed for the first three months at the rates
specified in this rule even in cases of halts on tour exceeding three
months.
60.         For the purposes of Rules 57 to 59
                 (a)    After a continuous halt of ten days’ duration, the halting place shall be
regarded as the officer’s temporary headquarters.
             (b)  A halt is continuous unless terminated  by an absence on duty at a
distance from the halting place exceeding eight kilometres for a period
including not less than three nights.
               (c)   In calculating the duration of a halt, any day on which the officer
travels or halts at a distance from the halting place exceeding eight
kilometres shall be excluded. On such a day the officer may drawdaily allowance or exchange it for mileage allowance, if admissible.
  Note .- If an officer proceeds on earned leave after a halt on duty at an
outstation and on termination of the leave resumes duty directly at thesame halting station and remains thereon halt for some more days, the
absence on leave should not be treated as interruption of halt, but the
whole period should be treated as one continuous spell of halt, leaving
out the leave period from the calculation of daily allowance.
S
UB DIVISION   II
Mileage  Allowance  and  Actual  Expenses  in  Place  of
or in  Addition  to  Daily  Allowance
61.         The Government may by general or special order and on such conditions as
they think fit to impose, permit any officer, or class of officers to draw mileage
241CHAP II ] [ RULES 61-62 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
allowance instead of daily allowance for the whole period of any
absence from headquarters, if they consider that the nature of theofficer’s duty is such that daily allowance is not sufficient to coverhis travelling expenses.
62.   (a)   Subject to any conditions which Government may by general or special order
impose, an officer may exchange his daily allowance for mileage allowanceon any day on which -
                 (i)    he travels by railway or s teamer or plane or by any two of them or
by all of them;
                  (ii)     he travels more than 32 kilometres by road, provided that, if a continuous
journey extends over more than one day, the exchange must be made forall such days and not for a part only of them.
   Note  .-  Short journeys within a radius of eight kilometres from headquarters
may not be added to other journeys, when calculating the distancetravelled by road or the amount of mileage allowance admissible forroad journeys.
      *(b)   When a journey by road is combined with a journey by railway or steamer or
plane under clause (i) of sub-rule (a) of this rule, mileage allowance may bedrawn on account of such journey by road, but such mileage will be limited tothe amount of daily allowance unless the journey by road exceeds thirty-twokilometres.
  Note .-  If an officer halts at the outstation, and the place or places of duty
visited be within the radius of 8 kilometres road mileage shouldalways be from the Railway Station to the Chief Public Office, nomatter where he proceeds first to the temporary residence or theplace of duty.
*[G O(P) No. 16/1965/Fin., Dated 06/01/1965]
242*[G O(P) No. 115/1976/Fin., Dated 10/04/1976]
†[G O(P) No. 83/1968/Fin., Dated  23/02/1968]              1.    Halt upto six hours
              2.    Halt exceeding six hours but not
exceeding  twelve hours
            3.    Halt exceeding 12 hours but not
exceeding twenty four hours
                 4.     Halt exceeding twenty four hoursNil
   Half daily allowance
Full daily allowance
One daily allowance for every 24
hours.  For fraction of 24 hours atthe end of halt, daily allowance willbe calculated as indicated above.TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES
CHAP II ] [ RULES 62-63
  Government Decision
         *If an officer performs a direct journey by road between two places
connected partly by road and partly by rail he will be entitled to T.A. atthe following rates.  Road mileage for the road portion upto the nearest
railway station plus road mileage at the rates as provided in Rule 21, Part
II, K.S.Rs for the portion connected by rail.
   Eg;  If an officer travels from Neyyattinkara to Quilon directly by road, he
will be entitled to the admissible road mileage for the distance from
Neyyattinkara to Trivandrum which is connected by road only andfrom Trivandrum to Quilon which is connected by rail at the rates as
provided in Rule 21, K.S.R., Part II.
63.        
  †Daily allowance for halt on tour at an outstation will be calculated on the
basis of the period of halt which will begin from the time the forward
journey ends at the outstation and will end at the time the return or
further journey commences.  The rate of daily allowance will be calculatedas follows :-
243CHAP II ] [ RULE 63 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
  Note 1 .- This concession is also admissible to officers who are entitled to
daily allowance for halts on tour but whose journeys are regulated byRules 103, 105 and 107.
  *Note 2 .- Officers and men of Fire Force Department are  exempted
from the operation of the above rule. They will be eligible todraw full daily allowance whenever they make a journey to aplace more than 8 km. from the fire stations in fire service vehiclesin an emergency or to attend an ambulance call, irrespective oftime limit or absence.
               Government Decision.
           
   †(i)   The daily allowance admissible for halt at an outstation under this rule
and the daily/mileage allowance admissible for the journey should becalculated separately, irrespective of whether the halt is preceded orfollowed by a journey which qualifies for daily or mileage allowance.
                 (ii)    Rule 62 (a) refers to travelling by a Government servant on any day for
a total distance exceeding 32 kilometres.  The number of journeys in aday or whether any one or more of the journeys exceed 32 kilometres orwhether each or the several journeys is less than 32 kilometres is notmaterial.  If the total travelling in a day exceeds 32 kilometres, he canexchange daily allowance for mileage allowance.  If he does not soexchange he gets only one daily allowance for that day to cover all thejourneys.
                    (iii)     Daily allowance for halt under this rule is to be calculated after computing
the total number of hours of halt at an outstation, irrespective of the totalnumber of days of halt and whether or not the daily allowance is exchangedfor mileage allowance.
*[G O(P) No. 266/1973/Fin., Dated  10/07/1973]
† [G O(P) No. 240/1978/Fin., Dated 06/03/1978]
244* [G O(P) No. 321/1970/Fin., Dated   15/05/1970]TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES CHAP II ] [ RULES 63-64
                 (iv)     In a case whether the Government servant, while on tour returns on the
same day, to the first halting station from another outstation.  Dailyallowance, if admissible for the journey, may be exchanged for mileageallowance, subject to the provisions of Rule 62 but in addition to thisallowance, no daily allowance for halt under Rule 63 is admissible evenif the halt at another outstation exceeds six hours.
              (v)     If a Government servant halts at more than one station on the  same day,
daily allowance for halt may be calculated after computing the total hoursspent on halt at all the outstations taken together.  This proviso appliesonly if the halts at more than one station begin and terminate within theduration of 24 hours.  If the duration of halt at the second station extendsbeyond 24 hours from the commencement of halt at the first outstation,daily allowance admissible for halt at the second station is to be reckonedseparately.
           * (vi)    When a Government servant, on tour, visits various outstations on duty
over a number of days, the total daily allowance admissible under this ruleshould not exceed the total daily allowance calculated on the basis of thetotal number of hours between the time of arrival at temporary residenceduty point at the first outstation and the time of departure from the temporaryresidence/duty point at the last station of tour.
S
UB DIVISION   III
Travelling  Allowance  Admissible for Journeys
 And Halts Within  Eight Kilometres
of Headquarters
64.         Government may, by general or special, order permit any officer or class of
officers to draw the actual  cost of hiring a conveyance on a journey forwhich no Travelling Allowance is admissible under these rules.
245CHAP II ] [ RULE 64 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
   Note  1 .- When a nongazetted or last grade officer is despatched on duty
to a place at some distance from his office, or is summoned to his officeby special order, of a gazetted officer outside the ordinary hours ofduty, the expenditure involved may be paid by Government and chargedto contingencies provided-
  (a)    That the head of the office certifies that the expenditure was actually
incurred, was unavoidable, and is within the scheduled scale ofcharges for the conveyance used.
  (b)    That the officer concerned is not entitled to draw Travelling Allowance
under the ordinary rules for the journey, and that he is not grantedany compensatory leave and does not and will not otherwise receiveany special remuneration for the performance of the duty whichnecessitated the journey.
  Note 2 .- The teaching staff in all Government Training Schools and
Government Training Colleges who undertake journeys for practiceteaching will be paid allowance at the following rates per day for theactual number of days on which they perform journeys for practiceteaching :-
  (i)   When the distance is less than two kilometres no conveyance
allowance will be allowed.
 (ii)   When the distance is two kilometres or more but less than four
kilometres - ````` 2.
(iii)  When the distance is four kilometres or more but less than six
kilometres -  ````` 3.
(iv)  *When the distance is six kilometres or more and no regular
Travelling Allowance is admissible - ````` 4.
*[G O(P) No. 145/1976/Fin., Dated  25/05/1976]
246*[G O(Ms.) No. 403/Edn., Dated 17/07/1961 & G O(P) No. 468/1961/Fin., Dated 20/11/1961]TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES
†[G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated 29/03/1989]CHAP II ] [ RULE 64
            * Effective from 1st April 1961.
  Note  3 .- Last grade officers deputed for treasury transactions within a radius
of 8 kilometres will be paid an allowance at the rate of † ````` 5 per day by
debit to the contingencies of the Department concerned, when the
distance to the treasury from the headquarters exceeds two kilometres
or more but does not exceed 8 kilometres subject to following :
  (i)  The allowance will be paid to such officers who are required
under Article 284 of the Kerala Financial Code, V olume I to be
engaged for cashing bills or remitting money into the treasurieswhen they are required to carry ````` 500 or more.
 (ii)  The allowance will be paid only for journeys to or from the
treasury which actually involve the carrying of money andnot otherwise.
(iii)  The allowance will be paid only if no regular T.A. or other
remuneration is payable for the day.
(iv)  The allowance will not be paid for more than three visits in a
week with reference to a particular office.
 (v)    The allowance will be admissible only if the officer is using  his own
conveyance or engaging one for hire, if conveyance is used no
allowance will be payable.
(vi)   The payment of the allowance will be extended to cases in which
the officers have to travel more than two kilometres from the office
to the State Bank for collection and remittance of cash eventhoughthe treasury is situated at a place within a distance of less than
two kilometres from the headquarters.
                      
† Effective from 15th December 1980.
247CHAP II ] [ RULES 64-65 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
  Explanation. - For the purpose of determining the distance of two kilometres
from headquarters, the duty point at the headquarters should be taken
as the place or office where the Government servant normally remains
on duty.
SECTION   III
 JOURNEYS ON TRANSFER
65.         Travelling Allowance may not be drawn under this section by an officer on
transfer from one station to another unless he is transferred for the public
convenience and is entitled to pay during the period occupied by the journey.A transfer at his own request should not be treated as a transfer for thepublic convenience unless the authority sanctioning the transfer, for specialreasons which should be recorded, otherwise direct.
  Note 1 .- An officer appointed to a post under Government as a result of
selection by the Public Service Commission should be granted T. A. ason transfer for joining the post if he already holds a substantiveappointment under Government, the Government of India or any otherState Government.
  
†Note 2 .- The Travelling Allowance of officers for journeys on temporary
transfers and relieving duties of not more than two months’ durationwill, however, be limited to the allowances  that would have beenadmissible if such journeys were journeys on tour.  Daily allowance asfor halt on tour will also be allowed for halts, at the new temporaryheadquarters in such cases.  When, however, the period of transfer issubsequently prolonged to more than  two months, the officerconcerned will be allowed to draw the Travelling Allowance otherwiseadmissible for journeys on transfer, deducting that had been drawnalready.  Where, however, the amount already drawn is larger than
what is admissible for journeys on transfer, no refund need be made.
†[G O(P) No. 271/1964/Fin., Dated 14/05/1964]
248*[G O(Ms.)No. 484/1961/Fin., Dated  29/11/1961]
†[G O(Ms.) No. 272/1964/Fin., Dated  14/05/1964]TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES CHAP II ] [ RULES 65-67
 “Temporary transfer” means a transfer to duty in another station which is
expressed to be for a period not exceeding two months.
              Government Decision No.1
               *A transfer which is not specifically stated to be temporary will be treated as
permanent.  All transferring authorities in cases of temporary transfers ofrelieving duties should specify in the order of transfer, the nature of thetransfer.
              Government Decision No. 2
           
   †In the case of temporary transfers all transferring authorities should specify
in the order itself that the transfer, is temporary not exceeding two months.
 Note 3 .- In cases where husband and wife are both State Government
employees and one of them is transferred at the same time or within sixmonths of transfer of the other, from  one and the same old station toone and the same new station, transfer T.A. will not be admissible toboth of them as independent Government servants.  Either of them willbe allowed to claim transfer  T.A. the other being treated as a memberof his/her family not in the State Government’s employment onfurnishing the following certificate. :-
  ‘Certified that my wife/husband who is employed under the State Government
and who has been transferred from………… to ………… within sixmonths of my transfer has not already claimed any transfer T.A.consequent on her/his transfer.’
66.         An Officer may draw mileage allowance for journey on transfer.
67. (a)    Unless in any case it be otherwise expressly provided in these rules, an officer
is entitled for a journey on transfer to the following:-
249CHAP II ] [ RULE 67 KERALA  SERVIC E RULES  PART  II
        I. FOR JOURNEYS BY RAIL OR STEAMER
                (i)      If the journey is by rail he may draw mileage allowance at twice the rate
applicable to him under sub-rule (a) of Rule 20 and if the journey is bysteamer three fares of the class of accommodation to which he is entitled,
the fares being limited to the lowest rate of such class of accommodation.
If the journey is actually performed by first class by a First Grade orSecond Grade Officer and the necessary certificate to this effect is
produced, the officer may claim a single railway fare and three times the
incidental expenses admissible to him under sub-rule (b) of Rule 20.
              (ii)     He may draw additional mileage allowance at the rate applicable to him
under Rule 20 or Rule 44 as the case may be, if two adult members of hisfamily accompany him, and at twice that rate if more than two members
accompany him.  If the journey is actually performed by first class by
members of the family accompanying a First Grade or Second GradeOfficer,  he may draw an extra fare for each adult member of his family for
whom full fare is actually paid and one half fare for each child for whom
such fare is actually paid.
             (iii)     He may draw the actual cost of carriage by goods train, steamer or
other craft, of personal effects upto the following maxima :-
 (a)  Officers whose actual pay
is **````` 3000 and above and
officers belonging to the
All India Services.2240 Kilograms
 (b)    Officers whose actual pay is
**````` 2500  and  above but
below  ** ````` 30001120 Kilograms
                          (c)   All other officers 560 Kilograms
                                 ** effective from 1st September, 1995
**[G O(P) No. 202/2006/Fin., Dated  05/05/2006]
250*[G O(P) No. 391/2002/Fin., Dated 19/06/2002]
† [G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated 29/03/1989]TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES CHAP II ] [ RULE 67
             In addition to the above concession, loading and unloading charges of
personal effects to officers transferred in public interests will be allowedas specified below :-
              (1)  Officers of the First Category.—  Actual charges for packing and loading of
personal effects at one end and for unloading and unpacking at other end
subject to a maximum of      * ````` 100 at each end.
                  (2)   Officers of the Second Category.— Actual charges for  the above purpose
subject to a maximum of * ````` 50 at each end.
                  (3)   Others.— Actual charges for the above purpose subject to a maximum
of * ````` 30 at each end.
                        *(This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect
from 1st September 1995).
   
†Note 1 .- In the case of journeys on transfer performed by First or Second
Grade Officers by Mail/Express Train and actual First class fares for
travel by such trains are claimed, a certificate to the effect that the
journey was performed by First class by Mail/Express Train should be
recorded by the claimant on the Travelling Allowance bill.
   Note 2 .-  If an officer carries his personal effects by passenger instead of by
goods train he may draw the actual cost of carriage upto a limit of the
amount which would have been admissible had he taken the maximumnumber of kilograms by goods train.
   Note 3 .- An officer who carries his personal effects by road between places
connected by rail may draw actual charges upto the limit of the amountwhich would have been admissible had he taken the same quantity by
goods train.  Loading and unloading charges as well as packing and
unpacking charges will be allowed in such cases also.  In cases where
251CHAP II ] [ RULE 67 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
the actual expenses claimed exceed the limit mentioned above, the
controlling authority may, for valid reasons, allow such claims subject
to the limit of the amount which would have been admissible, if the
maximum number of kilograms had been transported by goods train.
   Note 4 .- The claim for transport of personal effects between places connected
partly by road and partly by rail shall be regulated as follows:-
  (1)     For the rail portion.- As in Rule 67 (a) I (iii) and Note 2   or 3 of Rule
67 (a) I (iii)
*(2)    For the road portion.- As in Rule 67 (a) II (iii).
              Ruling
            Places where a railway station is situated within eight kilometres from the
central point of the respective localities, will be treated as places connected
wholly by rail, for purposes of calculation of charges for transport of personal
effects on transfer.
  Note 5 .- Subject to the prescribed maximum number of kilograms an officer
may draw the actual cost of transporting personal effects to his
new station from a  place other than his old station (e.g., from a
place where they are purchased en-route or have been left on theoccasion of a previous transfer) or from his old station to a place
other than his new station,  provided that the total amount drawn
including the cost of transporting these personal effects shall notexceed that admissible had the maximum admissible number of
kilograms been transported by goods train from the old to the new
station direct.
                (iv)   Provided that –
  (1)   the distance travelled exceeds 150 kilometres;
*[G O(P) No. 311/1966/Fin., Dated 13/07/1966]
252              II   Grade Officers in receipt of actual
pay of * `````  3000 and above
                  II    Grade Officers whose actual pay
is below * ````` 3000
                 III   Grade Officers       I    Grade Officers A motor car.
A motor car or a motor cycle.
A motor cycle.
An ordinary cycle
* [G O(P) No.391/2002/Fin., Dated 19/06/2002]
† [G O(P) No. 35/1964/Fin., Dated 20/01/1964]TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES CHAP II ] [ RULE 67
  (2)    the officer is travelling to join a post in which the possession of a
conveyance is advantageous from the point of view of his
efficiency, or is travelling after being relieved from a post in which
the possession of a conveyance was advantageous from the pointof view of his efficiency; and
  (3)   Conveyances are actually carried by rail, steamer or other craft;
            he may draw the actual cost of transporting at owner’s risk conveyances, on
the following scales:-
                       *Effective from 1
st September 1995
  Note 1 .-  In the case of the motor car, the cost of transporting a chauffeur or
cleaner may  also be drawn.
              Ruling
              † When the officer transports his motor car by rail he may draw one railway
fare for III class  accommodation in respect of the chauffeur or cleaner, provided
he certifies that the chauffeur or cleaner actually travelled by rail on thesection for which the transportation charges of motor car by rail are claimed.
253CHAP II ] [ RULE 67 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
   Note 2 .-  When an officer transports his motor car or motor cycle by road
under its own power between stations connected by rail or steamer orpartly by rail and partly by steamer he may draw an allowance of *14paise per  kilometre in respect of the motor car and *7 paise per kilometrein respect of the motor cycle, the distance to be reckoned for the purposeof the concession being limited to the distance between the  stationsby rail or steamer or both combined, as the case may be.  If the officerhimself travels by car or motor cycle he may  draw the fares admissibleunder clause (a)1 (i).  For any member of his family who travels by thecar or motor cycle, the officer may draw the extra fare or half fare whichshould have been admissible under clause (a) I (ii) if the member hadtravelled by rail or steamer.
  *Effective  from 1
st September 1985.
              Ruling
           † When the motor car is transported by road under its own power, no
railway fare for chauffeur or cleaner is admissible.  The allowance of  14paise per kilometre for the motor car transferred under its own powerincludes the travelling expenses of the cleaner or chauffeur travelling inthe car.
II. FOR JOURNEYS BY ROAD
               (i)   He may draw mileage allowance at twice the rate applicable to him
under Rule 31 and  Rule 44 or any rate applicable to him, which hasbeen fixed under Rule 32, as the case may be.
                (ii)    He may draw additional mileage allowance at the rate applicable to him
under Rule 31 or Rule 44 or any rates applicable to him, which has been
*[G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated  29/03/1989]
†[G O(P) No. 35/1964/Fin., Dated  20/01/1964]
254†[G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated 29/03/1989]
# [G O(Ms)No.  817/1964/Fin., Dated  21/12/1964]
*[G O(P) No. 311/1966/Fin., Dated 13/07/1966]TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES CHAP II ] [ RULE 67
fixed under Rule 32, as the case may be, if two members of his family
accompany him, and at twice that rate if more than two membersaccompany him.
†Note .-  Officers of the First Grade on transfer from one station to another
shall be entitled to the higher rate of mileage for all journeys irrespectiveof the distance travelled per day or the nature of the conveyance used,except in the case of journeys on temporary transfers and relievingduties of not more than two months’ duration.
               Government Decision
            
 # Children below five years can be counted as members of a family for the
purpose of claiming road mileage under the rule referred to above.
            (iii)   For the transportation of personal effects within the limits prescribed in
sub-clause I ( iii) of this clause he may draw the actual cost of transport
limited to the mileage allowance at thrice the rate applicable to him.*
                    (b)  The following explanations are given for the terms employed in clause (a)
of this rule:-
  (i)  The term ‘personal effect’ is not subject to definition, but the
controlling officer must satisfy himself that a claim toreimbursement on account of transportation is reasonable.
 (ii)   The term ‘motor cycle’ includes a side car.
  (iii)    A member of an officer’s family who follows him within six months
from the date of his transfer or precedes him by not more thanone month may be treated as accompanying him.  If such
member travels to the new station from a place other than the
255CHAP II ] [ RULE 67 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
officer’s old station the officer may draw the actual fare for the
journey made by such member by rail or steamer plus the roadmileage, if any, at the rate and subject to the conditionsprescribed in clause ( a) II (ii), for the actual distance of the
road journey performed by such member, provided that theirsum shall not exceed the total mileage  allowance that wouldhave been admissible had such member proceeded  from theold to the new station.  For the purposes of this rule, the gradeof an officer should be determined with reference to the factson the date of his transfer while the number of fares admissibleshould be determined with reference to the facts on the dateof the journey in respect of which the allowance is claimed.
              
 Ruling No. 1
            *In case an officer’s family performs the journey to the new station from a
place other than the old station by a lower class of accommodation than theclass of entitlement (in the case of journeys by rail or steamer), the mileagethat would have been admissible had the member proceeded from the oldstation to the new station would be reckoned on the basis of the class bywhich the journey was actually undertaken.
               Ruling No. 2
             If the members of his family have joined the Government servant at the
new station, within six months after the date of his transfer, they will beeligible for Travelling Allowance for their journey from the old station tothe new station though they may later on decide to proceed to someother station.
                (c)    An officer who claims higher Travelling Allowance on the ground that
members of his family accompanied him on transfer must support  his
* [G O(P) No. 290/1966/Fin., Dated 01/07/1966]
256*, † [G O(P) No. 279/1967/Fin., Dated  15/07/1967]TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES CHAP II ] [ RULE 67
claim by a certificate showing the number and relationship of the said
members.
            * (d)   An officer claiming the cost of transporting personal effects must
support his claim by a certificate that the actual expense incurred
was not less than the sum claimed and that only goods belongingto him and his family were carried. All vouchers claiming transporting
charges of personal effects by road should invariably mention the
number of the lorry or other conveyance by which, and the numberof the house from and to which the personal effects were transported.
The officer should also state in the certificate the weight of the
personal effects actually  carried and the amount actually paid fortheir transport separately by rail, road, steamer or other craft and
the controlling officer should record a certificate that he has
scrutinised the details and satisfied himself that the claim isreasonable.  The payees’ receipt for the charges paid for the
transport of personal effects should be attached to the bills.
           
   †(e)   An officer claiming the cost of transporting a conveyance by rail or
steamer must support his claim by railway or steamer receipt.  He
should also produce a certificate that the conveyance belonged tohim.  The receipt shall be attached to the bill.
              (f)   ‘Family’ for the purpose of these rules includes the officer’s wife,
children  and step-children residing with and wholly dependent onhim.  Not more than one wife is included in a family for the purpose
of these rules.  In the case of a female officer the ‘family’ will include
the ‘husband’ also provided he is residing with and whollydependent on her (the female officer).
  Note 1 .-  Charges for the transport of personal effects of an officer on transfer
may be admitted in audit, if they do not for good and sufficient reasons
257CHAP II ] [ RULE 67 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
accompany him but are carried within a reasonable time before or after
the date of his journey on transfer.
  Note 2 .- The expression ‘date of his transfer’ occurring in the first sentence
of Rule 67 (b) (iii)  means the date on which the officer takes over
charge at the new station in case his family follows him or the date onwhich he hands over charge at the old station in case his family precedes
him.
 Note 3 .- Claims preferred under this rule for the carriage of personal effects
should be admitted in all cases at the lowest available rates for “smalls,”
             “Smalls” are defined as goods which of themselves do not constitute
a working load for the unit of railway transport, the wagon.  The
minimum load constituting a wagon load is specified, by each of therailways who quotes reduced rates for wagon loads, in its tariffs.
  Note 4 .-  In cases where an officer is transferred from Station A to Station B
and again transferred within a reasonably short time to Station C hemay be allowed to recover the cost of carriage of personal effects from
Station A to Station C subject to the conditions—
  (1)    that  the total weight carried from Station B to Station C and from
Station A to Station C does not exceed the maximum limitprescribed in the rule, and
 (2)   that the total cost of transporting the effects from Station A to
Station B, from Station B to Station C and from Station A toStation C  does not exceed the amount admissible from Station A
to Station B plus that admissible from Station B to Station C.
  Note 5 .-  When an officer transports more than the maximum quantity
admissible by a cheaper route, he can draw actual charges not exceedingthe amount admissible for the maximum quantity by the normal
recognised route.
258*[G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated 29/03/1989]TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES CHAP II ] [ RULES 67-70
  Note 6 .- A motor car may be treated as a part of personal effects in cases
where an officer is not entitled to its free transport in addition to personaleffects.
68.       
*An officer transferred from one post to another who under the orders of
competent authority is permitted to hand over charge of his old post or totake over charge of the new post at a place other than the headquarters isentitled to -
                  (i)   Travelling Allowance as on tour from his old headquarters to the place
of handing over charge and from the place of taking over charge to thenew headquarters.
              (ii)   all concessions admissible under sub-rule (a) of rule 67 for journey
from the old to the new headquarters minus what will be admissibleto the Officer, for journey as on tour from the old to the newheadquarters.
69.        An officer whose headquarters are changed while he is on tour, and who
proceeds to his headquarters without returning to his old, is entitled to—
          (i)  Travelling Allowance as on tour for his journey upto the new
headquarters;
                   (ii)   *all concessions admissible under sub-rule (a) of rule 67 from the old to
the new headquarters minus what will be admissible to the Officer for ajourney as on tour from the old to the new headquarters.
70.          If the family of an officer, in consequence of his transfer, travels to a station
other than the new headquarters; Travelling Allowance for the journey of thefamily may be drawn subject to the conditions that it does not exceed theTravelling Allowance that would have been admissible if the family hadproceeded to the new headquarters station.
259CHAP II ] [ RULES 71-73 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
71.          An officer appointed to a new post while in transit from one post to another
is entitled to draw Travelling Allowance under this section for so much of
the journey on transfer as he had accomplished when he receives the fresh
orders and for the journey from the place at which he receives such orders tohis new station.
72.          An officer, who goes on leave not exceeding four months after he has given
over charge of his old post and before he has taken charge of his new post,
is entitled, whether the order of transfer is received before or after the
commencement of his leave, to Travelling Allowance under this section asfor a journey from his old to his new post.
72A.     *When a Government servant whose case is not covered by Rule 72 is
posted to a station other than that at which he was stationed before hewent on leave, the controlling officer may permit him to recover the
Travelling Allowance under sub-rules I (iii) and (iv) or II (iii), as the
case may be, of Rule 67 (a) as for a journey from his old to the new
station.
73.           When an officer of the Government is transferred to the administrative control
of another Government which has made rules prescribing amounts andconditions of Travelling Allowances, his Travelling Allowances for the journey
to join his post under that Government and for the return journey  will be
governed by the rules of that Government regulating Travelling Allowanceson transfer.
  Note .- The controlling officer for the purpose of Travelling Allowance for the
journey of an officer to join his post under a borrowing  Government as
well as for the return journey will be the controlling officer in regard to
his post under that Government.
*[G O(P) No. 295/1984/Fin., Dated 12/06/1984]
260* [G O(P) No. 21/1967/Fin., Dated 18/01/1967]TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES CHAP II ] [ RULES 74-77
SECTION   IV
JOURNEY  TO  JOIN  NEW  APPOINTMENT
74.       Except as otherwise provided in these rules Travelling Allowance is not
admissible to any person for the  journey to join his first appointment inGovernment service.
75.        When a pensioner, or an officer who has been thrown out of employment
owing to a reduction of establishment or the abolition of his post, isreappointed to Government service, the Government may permit him to drawTravelling Allowance.  Travelling Allowance under this rule should becalculated as for a journey on tour, but no allowance may be drawn for haltson the journeys.
76.          When mileage allowance is drawn under Rule 75 the rate admissible is that of
the grade to which the officer will belong after joining his post.
S
ECTION  V
JOURNEY  TO  ATTEND  AN  EXAMINATION
77.            An officer is entitled to draw Travelling Allowance for the journey to and from
the place at which he appears for an obligatory departmental examination,provided that Travelling Allowance shall not be drawn under this rule morethan twice for any particular examination.
            * Note 1 .- If a Government servant actually performs the journey to the
place of examination, but is not able to appear for the examinationbecause of its cancellation at the last moment Travelling Allowancemay be sanctioned to him by the Government/the Head ofDepartment concerned after due verification of the facts. This
concession will be admissible only if the  intimation regarding the
cancellation did not reach the Government servant before the
261CHAP II ] [ RULES 77-82 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
commencement  of the journey and the journey did not commence too
early, i.e. the date of its commencement was not in advance of theschedule date of the examination by more than the minimum number of
days required for performing the journey.
  * Note 2 .- If the place where the Government servant works is a centre for
the departmental examinations, he shall not be eligible for TravellingAllowance for appearing for the examinations at another centreunder this rule, except in case where he has to appear for theexamination at that centre owing to reasons beyond his control.
78.        The Government may permit an officer to draw Travelling Allowance for the
journey to and from the place at which he appears for an examination otherthan those specified in Rule 77.
79.      Travelling Allowance under this section should be calculated as for a
journey on tour but no allowance may be drawn for halts on the journeys.
S
ECTION  VI
JOURNEY  WHEN  PROCEEDING  ON  OR  RETURNING
FROM  LEA VE
80.          Except as otherwise provided in these rules, an officer is not entitled to any
Travelling Allowance for a journey made during leave or while proceedingon or returning from leave.
81.         The Government may, for special reasons which should be recorded, permit
any officer to draw, for a journey of the kind specified in  Rule 80 TravellingAllowance as for a journey on tour.
82.  (a)   When an officer is compulsorily recalled to duty before the expiry of his leave
and the leave is thereby curtailed by not less than one month, he is entitled to
* [G O(P) No. 80/1976/Fin., Dated 10/03/1976]
262TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES CHAP II ] [ RULES 82-84
draw mileage allowance for the journey from the place at which the order of
recall reaches him.  If the period by which the leave is curtailed is less than a
month, mileage allowance may be allowed at the discretion of the authorityrecalling the officer.
       (b)   If the officer recalled to duty is entitled to Travelling Allowance under Rule
72 he may not draw mileage allowance under clause (a) unless he abandons
his claims to the mileage allowance specified in Rule 66, Rule 67 (a) I (i) and
Rule 67 (a)  II  (i).
83.          If a nongazetted officer, on compulsory recall from leave exceeding four
months, is posted to a station other than that from which he went on
leave, he may, if his new station is distant more than 80 kilometres from
his old station, draw in addition to the allowance admissible under sub-rules I (ii) and (iv) and II (iii) of Rule 67 (a) Travelling Allowance for his
family under Rule 67 for the journey from the place at which the order of
recall reaches him to the new station; provided that the amount so drawnshall not exceed the amount admissible under Rule 67 for the journey
from the old to new station.
S
ECTION  VII
JOURNEY  FOR  JOINING  FIRST  APPOINTMENT
84.            In the following cases Travelling Allowances are admissible for joining a first
appointment:-
                (1)    To any person appointed to the Public Works the Medical or any other
department in any capacity requiring technical skill or knowledge for
which he has been specially trained.
         (2)  To recruit constables enlisted for service at the other district headquarters,
for joining their first appointment at Trivandrum.
  Note .- Teachers deputed for training from Departmental Schools are entitled
to Travelling Allowance under the ordinary rules, for their journey toand from the Training School or College.
263CHAP II ] [ RULE 85 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
SECTION  VIII
JOURNEYS  DURING  SUSPENSION   OR  TO  GIVE  EVIDENC E OR  TO
ATTEND  A  COURT  OF  LAW  AS  ASSESSOR  OR  JUROR  OR  IN
CONNECTION  WITH  THE  DEFENCE  OF  A  CASE
INSTITUTED  AGAINST  AN  OFFICER  FOR  ACTS
DONE  IN  HIS  OFFICIAL  CAPACITY
85.  (a)   *(i)   An officer under suspension who is required to perform any journey for
attending any departmental enquiry (other than police enquiry) or calledupon to appear before the Disciplinary Proceedings Tribunal may beallowed, for the onward and return journeys, Travelling Allowance asfor a journey on tour from his head quarters to the place at which thedepartmental enquiry or disciplinary proceedings, as the case may be,is or are held or from the place at which he has been permitted to resideduring suspension to the place at which the departmental enquiry ordisciplinary proceedings, as the case may be, is or are held, whicheveris less.  No Travelling Allowance will, however, be admissible if theenquiry or disciplinary proceeding as the case may be, is or are held atan outstation at his own request.
         !(ii)  An officer under suspension, if reinstated in service, pending
finalisation of the enquiry or disciplinary proceedings initiatedagainst him, and posted to a station other than the one where hewas working at the time of his suspension may be allowed TravellingAllowance for his journey to the new station as for journey ontransfer from the old station or from the place where he has beenpermitted to reside during  suspension whichever is less.  The grade ofthe officer and his Travelling Allowance for the journey shall bedetermined on the basis of his pay in the post he was holding at the time
*[G O(P) No. 385/1967/Fin., Dated 26/08/1967]
![G O(P) No. 601/1978/Fin., Dated 03/08/1978]
264*[G O(P) No. 159/1973/Fin., Dated  23/05/1973]
†[G O(P) No. 436/1965/Fin., Dated 19/11/1965]TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES CHAP II ] [ RULE 85
of his suspension or the pay in the post to which he is reinstated
whichever is lower.
                 (iii)   If an accused officer, whether under suspension or not, against whom
disciplinary proceedings have been initiated retires from service in thecourse of the proceedings or if an officer against whom disciplinaryproceedings are initiated after his retirement and is called upon toappear before Disciplinary Proceedings Tribunal/DisciplinaryAuthority/Enquiry Authority properly constituted under competentauthority for holding the enquiry will be allowed for the onward andreturn journey Travelling Allowance as for a journey on tour from hisplace of residence to the place where the enquiry is held.
  *Note .- His Travelling Allowance will be regulated by the grade to which he
belonged prior to his suspension/retirement.
   
†(b)   An accused officer, if not under suspension, when called upon to appear
before a Disciplinary Proceedings Tribunal/Disciplinary Authority/EnquiryAuthority, properly constituted under competent authority for holding theenquiry, may be allowed, for the onward and return journeys, TravellingAllowance as for a journey on tour from his headquarters.
              In case the accused officer is on leave and is permitted to reside  at a place
other than his headquarters during the leave, he may be allowed TravellingAllowance as for a journey on tour from his headquarters or from the place ofhis residence whichever is less.  No Travelling Allowance will, however, beadmissible if the enquiry is held at the outstation at his own request.
  Note .- In the cases covered by Rule 85, no allowance for halts on journeys or
at the outstation where the enquiry is held will be allowed.
265CHAP II ] [ RULE 86 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
86.          The following provisions apply to an officer who is summoned to give evidence :-
                (a)   In a criminal case, a case before a court-martial, a civil case to which
Government is a party or a departmental inquiry held by a properlyconstituted authority within the State :
   (i)    He may draw Travelling Allowance as for a journey on tour attaching
to his bill a certificate of attendance given by the Court or otherauthority which summoned him.
 (ii)  When he draws such Travelling Allowance, he may not accept
any payment of his expenses from the court or authority.  Anyfees which may be deposited in the court for travelling andsubsistence allowance of the witness must be credited toGovernment.
(iii)   If the court in which he gives evidence is situated within eight
kilometres of his headquarters and no Travelling Allowance istherefore admissible for the journey he may, if he is not inreceipt of Permanent Travelling Allowance, accept suchpayment of actual travelling expenses as the court may make.
                  (b)   Officials employed by the Central Government or by  the Government
of any of the States appearing in cases in which the State is a party, aswitnesses on summons before the Criminal Court of this State to giveevidence regarding facts of which they have official knowledge, will,on production of certificates of attendance issued by the courts beforewhich they appear as witnesses, be paid Travelling Allowance by theGovernment  by whom they are employed at their own rates.  In caseswhere the State is not a party, such officials will be paid TravellingAllowance by the summoning court according to its own rules and thecharges will be borne by the State within whose limits the summoningcourt is situated.
266TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES CHAP II ] [ RULE 86
                         When any of the Governments requisitions the services of an official
of a commercial department as a witness or any other official as a
technical or expert witness within the meaning of section 45 of the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872, the pay of the official concerned for theperiod of his absence from his headquarters and Travelling Allowance
and other expenses due to him will be borne by the requisitioning
Government.  The Travelling Allowance in such cases will be regulatedby the Travelling Allowance Rules applicable to the official summoned.
The charges will, in the first instance, be borne by the Government
under whom he is employed and will be passed on after audit forpayment to the requisitioning Government.
               (c)   A person formerly in the service of the Government summoned to give
evidence under the circumstances mentioned in clause (a) above shall
be entitled to receive Travelling Allowance (as for journeys on tour) at
the rate admissible to the person, when last in the service of theGovernment or if he is at the time employed under a fund administeredby the Government at the rates admissible for the appointment under
the fund.  He will be paid batta and Travelling Allowance by the court
which summoned him as witness from the allotment under ‘Witnessbatta’ according to the rule of the court, but if he is entitled under this
clause to more than what is allowed by the court, the difference will be
paid by the department in which the officer was last serving.  Bills forsuch claim should be supported by certificate similar to that referred to
in clause (a) (i)  above and showing the amount of the allowances paid
by the court.
   Note 1 .- An officer summoned to give evidence while on leave is entitled to
Travelling Allowance under this rule from and to the place from whichhe is summoned as if he were on duty.
267CHAP II ] [ RULE 86-86A KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
  Note 2 .- The T.A. claims of officers summoned by Civil Courts in any other
State will be settled in accordance with the reciprocal arrangementsentered into between this State and such other State.
  Note 3 .- T.A. claims of officers summoned as witnesses in departmental
enquiries in other States are regulated by the reciprocal arrangementsmade with the respective State Governments. Government haveaccordingly entered into the following reciprocal arrangements withthe Governments of Mysore and Tamil Nadu in this regard.
           In departmental enquiries  to which the State is a party, a Government
servant giving evidence  regarding facts of which he has officialknowledge will on production of a certificate of attendance by thesummoning authority,   be paid T.A. by the Government under whom heis serving.
In departmental enquiries to which the State is not a party, a Government
servant giving evidence  regarding facts of which he has official knowledgewill be paid T.A. by  the summoning authority according to the rules underwhich the Government servants draws  his Travelling Allowance or a journeyon tour on production of a certificate signed by the Controlling Officershowing the rates of T.A. and D.A. admissible to him for a journey on tour.If the Government servant is his own controlling officer, the certificate willbe signed by him as such. The expenditure on account of T.A. and D.A. paidby the summoning authority will be borne by the Government within theterritory of which that authority is situated.
86A.       If an officer undertakes a journey in connection with a civil or criminal case
instituted against him or acts done in his official capacity and the defence ofsuch case has been sanctioned by the competent authority such an officermay be granted Travelling Allowance admissible to an officer of his gradewhile on tour.
268*[G O(P) No. 216/1981/Fin., Dated  02/04/1981]
†[G O(P) No. 775/1964/Fin., Dated 19/11/1964]TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES CHAP II ] [ RULES 87-89A
87.        An officer summoned to give evidence in circumstances other than those
described in Rule 86 or to serve as an assessor or  juror in a court of law is notentitled, by reason of his position as an officer, to any payments other thanthose admissible by the rules of the court.  If the court pays him any sum assubsistence allowance or compensation, apart from payment for travellingexpenses, he must credit that sum to Government before drawing full pay forthe day or days of absence.
87A.      *If an Officer undertakes a journey on a summons from an investigating
Police Officer, in a criminal case, such Officer may be granted TravellingAllowance admissible to him while on tour if he is not an accused in thecriminal case.
                This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 2
nd
April 1981.
      S ECTION  IX
JOURNEYS  TO  OBTAIN  MEDICAL  TREATMENT,  ADVICE
OR  CERTIFICATE  OR  TO  APPEAR BEFORE
A  MEDICAL  BOARD
88.         Travelling Allowance is not admissible for a journey undertaken to procure
health certificate on first appointment to Government service.
89.       If, in order to obtain anti-rabic treatment, an officer is compelled to leave a
station at which he falls ill and at which anti-rabic treatment is not available,and travels to the nearest station where the treatment is available he may onproduction of a certificate from his authorised medical attendant that thejourney was in his opinion absolutely necessary, draw Travelling Allowancefor the journey.  This concession is admissible also to an officer on leave.
89A.      
†A Government servant suffering or suspected of suffering from  tuberculosis
may on production of a certificate from a T. B. Specialist that the journey was in
269CHAP II ] [ RULES 89A-93 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
his opinion absolutely necessary, draw Travelling Allowance in accordance
with the rules for his journey to the nearest Government Medical Institution andback in connection with his medical examination and periodical check-up.  Thisconcession is admissible also to an officer on leave.
90.           If an officer, being stationed where there is no medical officer, of Government, is
required to obtain a medical certificate from a medical officer of Government insupport of an application for an original grant of leave he may draw TravellingAllowance for the journey undertaken to obtain that certificate.
  Note.-  Travelling Allowance is not admissible for a journey to obtain a medical
certificate in support of an application for an extension of leave.
91.        If an officer, having obtained a medical certificate in support of an
application for an original grant of leave, is required to appear beforea medical board, or to appear before a nominated medical officer of
Government for further opinion as to the necessity for the leave
recommended in that certificate, he may draw Travelling Allowancefor the journey undertaken to obtain that opinion.
  Note .-  Travelling Allowance is not admissible for a journey to obtain a
second medical opinion in support of an application for an extensionof leave, but Travelling Allowance is admissible for a second orsubsequent journey, if necessitated, to obtain the certificate for theoriginal grant of leave.
92.           The journeys contemplated by Rule 90 and Rule 91 should not be undertaken
without the previous permission of the controlling officer, if such permissioncan be obtained without risk to the officer requiring medical service.
93.    (a)   An officer who is directed by his official superior in the interests of the public
service, to apply for an invalid pension, may, if he is required to make ajourney in order to appear before a medical  board, draw his actual travellingexpenses, subject to a maximum of the amount of Travelling Allowance
270TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES CHAP II ] [ RULES 93-96
calculated for the journey.  If it is necessary for him to return to his headquarters
after appearing before the medical board he may draw his actual expensessubject to the same maximum.  In both cases his Travelling Allowance billmust be supported by a certificate that he was directed to apply for an invalid
pension in the interests of public service and that he did not voluntarily askto retire.
       (b)   A competent authority may allow actual expenses, as limited by clause (a) of
this rule, to be drawn by an officer who voluntarily applies for an invalidpension, provided that the authority is satisfied that the circumstances of theapplicant are such as to justify the concession.
94.        Except as provided for in Rule 91 and Rule 93 no Travelling Allowance is
admissible for a journey undertaken in order to appear before a medicalboard.
95. (a) Travelling Allowance under Rules 89 to 94 should be calculated as for a
journey on tour, but no allowance may be drawn for halts on the journeys.
        (b)     (i)     All India Service Officers who perform journeys to seek medical advice/
treatment under the All India Services (Medical Attendance) Rules,1954 will be given Travelling Allowance for the journeys, as on tour.
                     (ii)    No daily allowance will be allowed for the halts made in this connection.
            (iii)   The family members of these officers will be allowed single first class
railway fare (i.e. the class of accommodation to which the officersthemselves are entitled) or single fare of any lower class by which thepatient actually travels for consulting a Government Specialist on the
advice of the authorised Medical Attendant.
     S
ECTION  X
JOURNEYS IN ATTENDANCE ON AN INCAPACITATED OFFICER
OR MEMBER OF HIS FAMILY
96.           A medical officer of Government who considers that an officer on whom it is
his duty to attend professionally should leave his station to obtain medical
271CHAP II ] [ RULES 96-98 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
advice or treatment or to proceed on leave, and that it is unsafe for him to
travel unattended, may if he does not himself accompany him, arrange for an
attendant, to do so; and the attendant (a) if an officer, shall be deemed to
have been travelling on duty and may draw Travelling Allowance for theonward and return journey as for a journey on tour, and (b) if not an officer,
may draw actual expenses.
              When the medical officer’s opinion as to the necessity for the journey and
for an attendant during it, cannot be obtained before its commencement, a
certificate from him that the journey with an attendant was necessary is
sufficient for the purpose of this rule.
S
ECTION  XI
JOURNEYS  ON  A  COURSE  OF  TRAINING
97.          When an officer or a student not already in government service is selected to
undergo a course of training, Government may decide the scale, if any on
which he shall draw-
                (a)    Travelling Allowance for the original journey to and the last journey from
the place of training, and for halts at such place;
           (b)   in the case of training at a school, college or similar institution,
Travelling Allowance for similar journeys on the occasion of holidaysand vacations; and
                (c)   Travelling Allowance for journeys during the course of training:
                 Provided that the scale so fixed shall not e xceed that admissible to officers
of similar status on duty at the place of training.
98.   (a)   An officer deputed to undergo a course of training, if the course of training
exceeds three months,  may draw Travelling Allowance under the rules forjourneys on transfer irrespective of whether the training is at a fixed centre
or not.  If the course of training does not exceed three months, the rules
which govern journeys on tour shall apply.
272*[G O(P) No.391/2002/Fin., Dated 19/06/2002]TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES CHAP II ] [ RULES 98-99
 *Note .- Omitted.
 (This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force on 2nd March 1990)
      (b)   If in a training school, a vacation is allowed, no Travelling Allowance is
admissible for journeys from and to the school unless for the purpose of
a practical course of training which is required to be undergone at another
station during such vacation.
SECTION  XII
JOURNEY  OF  THE  FAMILY  OF  AN  OFFICER
WHO  DIES  IN  SERVICE
99. (1)   If an officer dies while in service,  members of his family will be granted
Travelling Allowance for the journey to his home or to any other place where
they may wish to reside whether it is inside or outside the State  either from his
headquarters or from the place of his death, provided that the amount shallnot exceed what would be admissible for a journey from the officer’s
headquarters to his home.
  Note .- For the purposes of this rule the headquarters of an officer on leave
shall be considered to be the place of his headquarters where he was
last on duty.
       (2)   The rates of Travelling Allowance shall be those which would be admissible
under the rules for a journey on transfer less that admissible to the officer.
       (3)   The family should perform the journey within three months of the death
of the Government employee and the Travelling Allowance should be
claimed as soon as possible after the journeys is over.  The TravellingAllowance may be drawn in advance if the officer drawing the bill is
satisfied that the journey will be made.
        (4)    Bills will be drawn and countersigned by the officers authorised to deal with
the bills of the deceased Government employee,  if the deceased officer is a
273CHAP II ] [ RULES 99-99A KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
nongazetted officer and if the officer is a gazetted officer, the bill will be
countersigned by his superior officer.
       (5)   # [Deleted]
               Ruling
          The term “Travelling Allowance” mentioned in this rule includes cost of
transportation of personal effects also.
 SECTION  XIII
JOURNEY  OF  AN  OFFICER  AFTER  RETIREMENT
99A.         Travelling Allowance will be allowed to an officer on retirement to enable him
to proceed to any place within or outside* the State where he proposes to
settle down after retirement subject to the following conditions :-
          (i)  The concession will be given only in cases of retirement  on
superannuation, or on invalid, retiring or compensation pension, or
with effect from 30th July 1975, in cases of compulsory retirement
under Rule 60 A, Part I of these rules, but will not be given in other
cases of compulsory retirement or cases of removal or dismissal
from service.
          †,*(ii)   The Travelling Allowance will be given as for a journey on transfer
from the last headquarters to the place  of residence, where he
proposes to settle down.  For  regulating the claim accordingly,every Government servant should furnish to his controlling officer
before his retirement, a declaration indicating the station where he
intends to reside after retirement.  The officers compulsorily retiredunder Rule 60-A, of Part 1 of these rules shall furnish the declaration
within one month after such retirement.
# [G O(P) No. 277/1975/Fin., Dated  30/06/1975]
*[G O(P) No. 44/1978/Fin., Dated  10/01/1978]
†[G O(P) No. 74/1977/Fin., Dated 28/02/1977]
274** [G O(P) No. 595/1978/Fin., Dated  29/07/1978]
*[G O(P) No. 537/1980/Fin., Dated  03/09/1980]
†[G O(P) No. 200/1970/Fin., Dated  06/04/1970]
# [G O(P) No. 277/1975/Fin., Dated  30/06/1975]TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES CHAP II ] [ RULES 99A-99B
          **(iii)   The journey shall be performed within one year of the date of retirement:
                          *Provided that officers who are re-employed under the Government
of Kerala and whose re-employment is ordered while on leavepreparatory to retirement or within one year of the date of retirement,can avail themselves of the benefit of this rule, if the journey isperformed within one year from the date of expiry of the period ofre-employment.
             
 †(iv)   If Travelling Allowance advance is allowed it should be restricted to 75
per cent of the Travelling Allowance admissible for the journey and adeclaration should be obtained from the Government servant giving hisconsent for recovery from his pension, if need be.  The detailed T.A. billshould be presented **within two months of the date of drawal of theadvance to the last controlling officer for adjustment and countersignature.  If the Government servant is a Gazetted Officer the bill should
be sent to the office of the Accountant General for pre-audit before
payment.
                      This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect
from 8
th January 1970.
99B.      # [Deleted]
275CHAP III ] [ RULES 100-103 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
CHAPTER III
TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCE  ADMISSIBLE  WHEN  MEANS  OF
TRANSPORT  ARE  SUPPLIED  WITHOUT  COST  TO
THE  OFFICER  TRA VELLING
SECTION  I
JOURNEYS  BY  RAILWAY
100.         When  an officer is entitled to or is allowed free transit by railway, whether on
a free pass or otherwise the mileage allowance which he draws for the journeymust be reduced by the amount of the fare which, but for such free transit, he
would have paid. This rule applies to cases in which  a free pass is issued on
any railway.  The reduction made must include the full number of fares  coveredby the pass, unless the officer certifies that he did not use the pass in respect
of any fare or fares for which no reduction is made.
101.         When an officer in receipt of permanent Travelling Allowance uses a free pass
on a railway within his sphere of duty, he must deduct from his PermanentTravelling Allowance for the month the amount of the railway fares which he
would have paid if he had not travelled on a pass.
102.     When an officer is permitted to travel by railway in a higher class on
payment of a lower fare, his mileage allowance must be reduced by the
amount by which the fare of the class in which he travels exceeds the fare
actually paid.
S
ECTION  II
JOURNEYS  BY  SEA  OR  RIVER  STEAMER
103.     When an officer travels by sea or river, otherwise than on payment of
passage money, in a steamer the cost of which is paid by Government or
by a local fund, he may draw no Travelling Allowance except subject to
the provision of Rule 110* the daily allowance of his grade;  provided
that, when his servants and luggage are not conveyed on the vessel but
*[G O(P) No. 113/1976/Fin., Dated 06/04/1976]
276*[G O(P) No. 113/1976/Fin., Dated 06/04/1976]TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES CHAP III ] [ RULES 103-105
are sent separately at his expense, he may draw in addition the actual
cost of transporting them.
104.         When an officer is allowed free transit by sea or river steamer, otherwise than
in a Government vessel, the mileage allowance which he draws for the journeymust be reduced by the amount of the fare which, but for such free transit, hewould have paid.  If he travels on a free pass, the reduction made mustinclude the full number of fares covered by the pass unless the officer certifiesthat he did not use the pass in respect of any fare or fares for which noreduction is made.
S
ECTION  III
JOURNEYS  BY  AIR
105.       When an officer is allowed free transit by air in a Government machine or in
a machine chartered by Government for the purpose, he is entitled subject tothe provisions of Rule 110* to Travelling Allowance as follows:-
                (a)   If he has not to provide  separate conveyance at his own expense for
his servants or luggage, he may draw the daily allowance of his gradeand may not exchange it for mileage allowance. If, however, part of thejourney is made by other means of locomotion, he  may at his optiondraw in lieu of daily allowance the mileage allowance admissible forthat part.
                        *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect
from 15
th May 1970.
            (b)   If he has to provide separate conveyance at his own expense for his
servants or luggage he may-
  (i)     if the journey is between places connected by rail or steamer draw
incidental expenses or three-fifth of a fare as the case may be of
277CHAP III ] [ RULES 105-107 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
the class of accommodation to which he is entitled by railway or
steamer, or
(ii)    if the journey is between places not connected by rail or steamer
draw the daily allowance of his grade or half the mileage allowance
calculated for the journey.
                If, however, a part of the journey is performed by other means of locomotion
he may draw mileage allowance admissible for that part subject to the condition
laid down in sub-clause (i) and (ii) of clause (b) of Rule 62.
106.      An officer, when making a journey by air in a Government machine or in a
machine chartered by Government for the purpose shall pay a first class full
or half railway fare, as the case may be, to Government on behalf of each
person not entitled to travel in that machine who may accompany him.
  Note .- If an officer wishes to take with him any non-entitled person in a
Government machine or in a machine chartered by Government, he
should obtain the sanction of the Government.  In giving such sanction,care should be taken to see that no extra expenditure is caused to
Government thereby.
S
ECTION  IV
OTHER  JOURNEYS
107.     Except where otherwise expressly provided in these rules, when on  a
journey other than a journey by railway or by sea or river steamer or by
air an officer uses a means of locomotion provided at the expense of
Government, a local fund or Government of another State and does not
pay the cost of its use or propulsion, he is entitled subject to theprovisions of Rule 110 to Travelling Allowance as follows:-
               (a)   If he has not to provide separate conveyance at his own expense for his
servants or luggage, he may draw the daily allowance of the grade andmay not exchange it for mileage allowance.  If, however, part of the journey
is made by other means of locomotion, he may at his option draw in lieu of
daily allowance the mileage allowance admissible for that part.
278*, † [G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated  29/03/1989]TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES
# [G O(P) No. 617/1963/Fin., Dated 12/12/1963]CHAP III ] [ RULES 107-110
             Ruling
                # When a Government servant performs a journey on transfer in a conveyance
provided by the Government, he may be allowed daily allowance for each calendar
day of journey.  He will not, however,   be  eligible  for  any  additional  daily
allowance   for  the me mbers of his family who accompany him and for whom
he does not pay any fare, nor will he be paid any allowance for the
personal effects carried along with him for which he does not pay any
charge except in the case of transport by rail in which case he may beallowed the actual charges as provided under Rule 67 (a) I (iii), Kerala
Service Rules, Part II.
                (b)   If he has to provide separate conveyance at his own expenses for his
servants or luggage, he may, if the conditions of Rule 62 are fulfilled,exchange his daily allowance for half the mileage allowance calculated
for the journey and draw in addition the mileage allowance admissible
for any part of the journey made by other means of locomotion.
108.        When an officer is provided with means of locomotion as in Rule 107 but pays
all the cost of its use or propulsion, he may draw Travelling Allowance  under
the ordinary rules, subject to the deduction of such fixed hire or charge asGovernment may fix.
109.      *[Deleted]
      SECTION  V
 METHOD  OF  CALCULATING  DAILY  ALLOWANCE
110.      † When an officer, who is supplied with means of conveyance without
charges, returns to his headquarters on the same day, daily allowance
admissible under Rule 103, Rule 105 and Rule 107 will be limited to the
incidental expenses at the rates given below:
279 Officers of the First Grade 8 paise per kilometre
 Officers of the Second Grade 6 paise per kilometre
 Officers of the Third Grade 4 paise per kilometre
 Officers of the Fourth Grade 3 paise per kilometre  ..
  ..
  ..
  ..CHAP III ] [ RULE 110 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
                Effective from 1st July 1980.
              When an officer is provided with free conveyance for part of the journey or
for one way journey only (i.e. either for going from or for return toHeadquarters)  and he returns to his head quarters on the same day the dailyallowance if admissible under the rules will be  limited  to the incidentalexpenses as indicated above  for the onward or downward journey as thecase may be.  He may in addition draw mileage allowance admissible for thepart of the journey for which the conveyance is not provided free of charges,provided the distance travelled exceeds 32 kilometres.
   Note 1 .- A chauffeur or driver or cleaner or mechanic of a motor car, jeep,
van, wagon, lorry, boat or other means of locomotion supplied at theexpense of Government will be allowed daily allowance at the ratesspecified under these rules.
  *Note 2 .- The rates of incidental expenses mentioned in this rule shall be
subject to a minimum of half daily allowance.
             Effective from 1
st May 1981.
* [G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated  29/03/1989]
280† [G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated  29/03/1989]TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES CHAP IV ] [ RULE 111
CHAPTER IV
GRANT  OF  TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCE  TO  THOSE  WHO
ARE  NOT  IN  REGULAR  GOVERNMENT  SERVICE
111.      The grant of Travelling Allowance and Daily Allowance to non-official
members of Committees, Boards, Councils, etc. will be  regulated asfollows:-
               (i)   Committees, Boards, Councils, etc. constituted by Government will be
classified into two-First Class and Second Class—according to theirimportance, jurisdiction and the over all status of the members.  Whether
a committee (or other body) is of the First Class or the Second Class
will be specified in the orders constituting the committee.
                    (ii)    Non-officials (including retired officials) serving in First Class Committees,
Boards, etc., will be allowed Travelling Allowance and daily allowance at
the rates admissible to First Grade Officers .
         (iii)  Non-officials (including retired officials) serving in Second Class
Committees, Boards, etc., will be allowed Travelling Allowance and
daily allowance at the rates admissible to Second Grade Officers drawinga pay of more than  
† ````` 1500  per mensem.
                         † Effective from 1st September 1985.
          (iv)  The Travelling Allowance admissible to Members of the Legislative
Assembly serving in any committee (or other body) will, however, be
regulated by the provisions of the Payment of Salaries and Allowances
Act.
                 (v)   Members of Parliament serving in such committee (or other body) will
be allowed Travelling Allowance and daily allowance at the rates
281CHAP IV ] [ RULES 111-112 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
admissible to M.L.As. subject to the condition that in respect of railway
journeys they will be allowed only the incidental expenses, since they
are in possession of free railway pass.
                  (vi)   The Travelling Allowance Rules in the Kerala Service Rules applicable
to First and Second Grade Officers of Government will apply to the
non-official members of First and Second Class committees respectively.*Member of a First class Committee will however be allowed mileage
for road journeys between places connected by railway, if any public
interest is served by such road journeys.
  Note.-  Non-official members, other than Members of the Legislative Assembly,
serving on First  and Second  Class Committees, may be paid per day of
attendance at the  meetings of the committees at places within a radiusof eight kilometres from their residence, sitting fees to cover out ofpocket expenses at the rate equal to the amount of Daily Allowance
admissible for halts at the station.
112.     The following principles should be observed in granting Travelling
Allowances to witnesses, who are not officers but are summoned to give
evidence in a case in which the conduct of an officer is the subject of a
departmental enquiry held by officers serving directly under theGovernment:-
                (1)  Travelling Allowance will be paid only in respect of witnesses whose
evidence is considered to be of material value by the officer conductingthe enquiry.
                  (2)    Such allowances may be paid to witnesses summoned on behalf of the officer
whose conduct is the subject of a departmental enquiry in the event of theofficer concerned clearing himself.
*[G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated  29/03/1989]
282* [G O(P) No. 1/1966/Fin., Dated 01/01/1966]TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES CHAP IV ] [ RULES 112-112A
                  (3)    In exceptional cases the officer conducting the enquiry may, for reasons to be
recorded, recommend to the Government that the principles laid down above
be departed from owing to special reasons and it is for the Government toaccept or reject the recommendation.
112 A.  
 *The rates of Travelling Allowance and batta in the case of those coming
under Rule 112 will be the rates allowable from time to time to non-officialwitnesses summoned by criminal courts, the discretion in the matter of
classification of such witnesses for the purpose being vested with the
concerned authority conducting the enquiry
.
283CHAP V ] [ RULES 113-116 KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II
CHAPTER  V
CONTROLLING  OFFICERS
113.     The Government shall declare what authority shall be the controlling
officer, for Travelling Allowance purposes, of each officer or grade ofofficers.  It may, if it thinks fit, declare that any particular officer shall behis controlling officer.
114.     Except where expressly permitted by a competent authority a controlling
officer may not delegate to a subordinate his duty of countersignature.
115.       Except as provided in Rule 113 no bill for Travelling Allowance, other than
Permanent Travelling Allowance shall be paid unless it is signed orcountersigned by the controlling officer concerned.
116.     It is the duty of a controlling officer, before signing or countersigning a
Travelling Allowance bill—
                (a)    to scrutinise the necessity, frequency and duration of journeys and halts
for which Travelling Allowance is claimed, and to disallow the whole orany part of the Travelling Allowance claimed for any journey or halts, if heconsiders that a journey was unnecessary  or unduly protracted or that ahalt was of excessive duration;
                   (b)    to scrutinise carefully the distances entered in Travelling Allowance bills;
                 (c)   to satisfy himself that mileage allowance for journeys by railway or
steamer, excluding additional fare or fares allowed for incidentalexpenses, has been claimed at the rate applicable to the class ofaccommodation actually used and that where the actual cost oftransporting servants, personal effects, etc., is claimed under theserules the scale on which such servants, effects, etc., weretransported was reasonable; and to disallow any claim which, in hisopinion, does not fulfil that condition;
284TRA VELLING  ALLOWANCES CHAP V ] [ RULE 116
                (d)    to check any tendency to abuse the option of exchanging daily allowance for
mileage allowance;
                (e)    to observe any subsidiary rules or orders which a competent authority
may make for his guidance; and
               (f)    to satisfy himself before permitting a claim under Rule 23 that the officer
actually bought  a through ticket at the rate claimed and that it was notpossible for him to get a through ticket at a cheaper rate by paying only forthe appropriate class of accommodation over that portion of the journeywhere accommodation of that class was available.
285APPENDICES
286LIST  OF  APPENDICES
VII
VIII
IX
(Please see) The Kerala Service
Rules, part III.
[Deleted]X
XIModel form of Agreement
List of Heads of Departments.
Rules relating to charge of office.
Rules regulating grant of Special
Pay and CompensatoryAllowances.
Rules regulating the grant of
overtime allowance to the staffof Departments during sessionsof the Legislative Assembly.
List of recognised Tuberculosis
and Leprosy Institutions for
purposes of grant ofextraordinary leave to officersnot in permanent employ.
[Deleted]
Rules relating to casual leaveRules for the grant of leave to
officers appointed for limitedperiods.
List of Hilly Tracts.I
II
III
IV
IV-A
V
VI
,,Appendix
,,
,,
,,
,,
,,
,,
,,
,,
,,
,,KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
287Rules for the grant of leave to
Radiation workers in the StateMedical Service.
Rules for the grant of leave
without allowances or taking upemployment abroad or withinIndia.
Rules for the grant of LWA for
those ineligible for leave forstudy purpose under Rule 88 orRule 91 Part I, KSRs.
Rules for the grant of LWA for
joing spouse,,
,,
,,
,,XII
XII A
XII B
XII CKERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
288APPENDIX  I
MODEL  FORM  OF  AGREEMENT
(Referred to in Rule 8 of Part I)
          ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT made this the ………………. day of
…………… two thousand and ……………………. BETWEEN Sri
…………………………. (here enter name and address) of the first part
and the Governor of Kerala (hereinafter called the Government) of
the other part.
              WHERE AS THE GOVERNMENT have engaged the party of the first part and
the party of the first part has agreed to serve the Government on the terms and
conditions hereinafter contained.
                 NOW THESE PRESENTS WITNESS as follows:-
                 1.  The party of the first part shall submit himself to the orders of the
Government and of the officers and authorities under whom he may
from time to time be placed by the Government and shall remain in
the service for the term of …….years commencing from the…………………..day of 20………….subject to the provisions herein
contained.
                   2.  The party of the first part shall devote his whole time to his duties
and at all times obey the rules including the Government Servants’
Conduct Rules prescribed from time to time being for the regulation
of the public service to which he may belong and shall wheneverrequired, proceed to any part of India and there perform such duties
as may be assigned to him.
                     3.  The service of the party of the first part may be terminated as follows:-
                         (1)     At the end of  the first year by either party without notice.APPENDIX I ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
289*[G O(P) No. 199/1982/Fin., Dated  24/04/1982]KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
 (2)    At any time on *two calendar months’ notice in writing given to
him by the Government if, in the opinion of the Government, the
party of the first part proves unsuitable for the efficientperformance of his duties during service under this agreement.
        *Provided that the Government may in lieu of any notice herein
provided for, give the party of the first part, a sum equivalent to
the amount of his pay of two months or shorter notice than two
months, if they pay him a sum equal to the amount of his pay forthe period by which such notice falls short of two months.
          *Effective from 24
th April 1982.
(3)      By the Government without previous notice if the Government
are satisfied on medical evidence that the party of the first
part is unfit and is likely for a considerable period to continueunfit by reason of ill-health for the discharge of his duties inIndia.
         PROVIDED always that the decision of the Government that the
party of the first part is likely to be unfit shall be conclusively
binding on the party of the first part.
 (4)       By the Government or their officers having proper authority without
any previous notice if the party of the first part shall be guilty of any
insubordination, intemperance or other misconduct or of any breach
or non-performance of any of the provisions of these presents or ofany rules pertaining to the public service to which he may belong.
(5)     By *two calendar months’ notice in writing given at any time
during service under this agreement (except the first yearAPPENDIX I ]
290*, † [G O(P) No. 199/1982/Fin., Dated  24/04/1982]APPENDIX I ]
thereof) either by him to the Government or by the Government
or their authorised officer to him without cause assigned.
         *Effective from 24th April 1982.
                 PROVIDED always that the Government may, in lieu of any notice herein
provided for,  give the party of the first part a sum equivalent to theamount of his pay of *two months or shorter notice than *two months ifthey pay him a sum equal to the amount of his pay for the period bywhich such notice falls short of *two months.
                 *Effective from 24
th April 1982.
               ( †)  Omitted.
               The second Proviso is in effect from 24th April 1982.
              The term ‘pay’ for the purpose of this clause shall mean the pay (including
special pay and personal pay, if any), the party of the first part is receiving
under these presents at the time, unless he is receiving officiating pay inwhich case it shall mean the pay (including special pay and personal pay, ifany) of his substantive appointment.
                       4.    If the party of the first part is suspended from duty during investigation
into any charge of misconduct mentioned in sub-clause (4) of clause 3hereof, he shall not be entitled to any pay during such period ofsuspension but shall be entitled to receive a subsistence grant at suchrate as the Government may decide to allow him.
                5.   The scale of pay attached to the post of…………...…….. to which the
party of the first part is appointed shall comprise the following monthlyrates of pay in successive stages of every twelve months’ service :-
(Pay `````.)KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
291KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
              Stages:
                        1 ……………
                        2. …………...                        3. …………...
                        etc.
             He shall from the ……………. be granted pay at the rates of Rupees
………… per mensem in the aforesaid scale and shall receive pay in
the succeeding stages provided for in that scale in accordance withthe     provisions   of   the   rules   from    time to   time    in  force andapplicable to his case, service in the stages reckoning from theaforesaid date.  The pay from time to time payable to him under thesepresents shall be paid for such time as he shall serve under thisagreement and actually perform his duties commencing from theaforesaid date and ceasing on the date of his quitting service or onthe day of his discharge therefrom or on the day of his death if heshall die whilst in service.  If at any time the party of the first partproceeds on deputation on foreign service his pay during deputationshall be regulated by the ordinary rules regarding deputation onforeign service.
                      6.   The party of the first part shall be eligible, subject to the exigencies
of public service,  for leave and leave salary under the rulescontained in Appendix VIII to Kerala Service Rules, as amendedfrom time to time.
                    7.    If the party of the first part is required to travel in the interest of public
service he shall be entitled to Travelling Allowance on the scale providedfor  in the rules framed by the Government from time to time in force andapplicable to the class of officers serving in the same station to whichGovernment may declare him to correspond in  status or conditions ofservice.APPENDIX I ]
292APPENDIX I ]
                8.  The party of the first part shall be eligible for any concessions in
relation to medical attendance and treatment that may be prescribedby the Government for the class of officers serving in the samestation to which the Government may declare the party of the firstpart to correspond in status or conditions of service.
               9.   Notwithstanding anything herein before contained the party of the
first part shall, unless otherwise decided by the Government, beentitled to receive in whole or in part as may be authorised by the
Government  the benefits of any improvement that may be sanctioned
by the Government subsequent to the date of these presents in theterms and conditions of the service of members of the public service towhich he may for the time being belong and the decisions of theGovernment in respect of such improvement in the terms and conditionsof service of the party of the first part shall operate so as to modify tothat extent the provisions of these present.
              10.  Notwithstanding anything herein before contained the pay and leave
salary admissible under these present shall be subject to any emergencycut that may be ordered by the Government for the same period and onthe same terms as for other officers under the administrative control ofthe Government.
                   11.   In respect of any matter in regard to which no provision has been made
in this agreement the provisions of the Kerala Service Rules shall applyto the extent to which they are applicable to the service hereby providedfor and the decision of the Government as to their applicability shall befinal.
             In witness whereof Sri …………………… the party of the first part and Sri
………… ……………… Secretary to the Government for and on behalf of the
Governor of Kerala hereunto set their hands the day and year first above
written.KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
293KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
                 Signed by Sri…………………… the party of the first part.
                         In the presence of witnesses:—                         1 ……………………….                         2 ……………………….                  Signed by Sri ………………….. Secretary to the Government for and on
behalf of the Governor of Kerala.
                         In the presence of witnesses :—
         1………………………….
                         2………………………….APPENDIX I ]
294APPENDIX II
LIST  O F HEADS  OF  DEPARTMENTS
[Referred to in Rule 12 (13) of Part I]
1.       Secretaries, Additional Secretaries and Joint Secretaries to Government
(including Secretary to the Legislative Assembly).
2.         Board of Revenue
3.         Director of Public Instruction
4.         Additional Director of Public Instruction
5.         Director of Collegiate Education
6.         Director of Examination and Text Books
7.         Director of Technical Education
8.         Chief Engineers
9.         Chief Conservator of Forests
10.       Director of Agriculture
11.       The High Court
12.       Chairman, Public Service Commission
13.       Director of Public Relations
14.       Transport Commissioner
15.       Inspector General of Police
16.       Director of Health Services
17.       Advocate General
18.       Registrar of Co-operative Societies
19.       Inspector General of Registration
20.       [Deleted]
21.       Labour CommissionerAPPENDIX II ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
29522.       Examiner of Local Fund Accounts
23.       Inspector General of Prisons
24.       Director of Animal Husbandry
25.       [Deleted]
26.       Director of Harijan Welfare
27.       † Director of  Medical Education
28.       * Director of Municipal Administration
29.       Director of Industries and Commerce
30.       Director of Fisheries
31.       Director, Bureau of Economics and Statistics.
32.       Director of Indigenous Medicine
33.       # Director of Insurance
34.       Chairman, Kerala Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal, Trivandrum.
35.       Principals, Ayurveda Colleges.
36.       Industrial Tribunals
37.       The State Port Officer
38.       Commissioner, Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowment Fund.
39.       Director of Tourist Department
40.       Presiding Officer, Labour Courts
41.       Director of Museums and Zoos
42.       Secretary to Governor and Comptroller, Governor’s Household
43.       Director of Employment and Training
44.       Director of Geology
†[Substitution G O(P) No. 207/2012/ Fin., Dated  03/04/2012  (with effect from 10/05/ 1983)]
*[G O(P) No.196/2002/Fin. Dated 03/04/2002 with effect from 05/09/1980]
# [G O(P) No.705/1979/Fin., Dated 06/08/1979]KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II APPENDIX II ]
296![Substitution G O(P) No.544/2007/Fin., Dated 13/11/2007, come into force on 16/12/1993]
†[G O(P) No.172/1984/Fin., Dated  20/03/1984]
# [G O(P) No. 1101/1979/Fin., Dated 21/12/1979]
*[G O(P) No.197/2002/Fin., Dated 03/04/2002]APPENDIX II ]
45.        Controller of ! Legal Metrology
46.        Drugs Controller
47.        Chairman, Land Board
48.        Chief Town Planner and Consulting Architect
49.        Director of Panchayats
50.        Director of Archaeology
51.        [Deleted]
52.        Director of Fire Force
53.        Director of Soil Conservation
54.       † Director of Factories and Boilers
55.        State Editor, Kerala Gazetteers
56.        # Director, Rajya Sainik Board
57.        Vigilance Commissioner
58.        Director of Vigilance Investigation
59.        Director of Treasuries
60.        Director of State Lotteries
61.        Chief Electrical Inspector of Government
62.        Secretary of Official Language (Legislative) Commission
63.       * Director of Printing
             * Effective from 12th August 1992.
64.        Director of State Water Transport DepartmentKERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
297*[G O(P) No. 876/1987/Fin., Dated 08/10/1987]
**[G O(P) No. 28/1975/Fin., Dated 17/01/1975]
! [G O(P) No. 142/1980/Fin., Dated 19/02/1980]
~ [G O(P) No. 250/1981/Fin., Dated  24/04/1981]
†[G O(P) No.124/1982/Fin., Dated 19/03/1982]
@ [G O(P) No. 170/1984/Fin., Dated 20/03/1984]
¤ [G O(P) No. 670/1984/Fin., Dated 17/11/1984]
# [G O(P) No. 743/1984/Fin., Dated 15/12/1984]KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
65.         * Chief Chemical Examiner to Government
              This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 23rd
September 1983.
66.         ** Director of Civil Supplies
67.         Director of Coir Development
68.         ! Director of Handlooms
           This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from
22nd  September 1979.
69.         ~ Member-Secretary, State Planning Board
Effective from 24th April 1981.
70.         † Principal, Government Homeopathic Medical College, Calicut
Effective from 19th March 1982.
71.         @ Director of Homeopathy
Effective from 21st April 1973.
72.         ¤ Director of Publications, Department of Cultural Publications.
Effective from 26th August 1983.
73.         # Director of Archives
Effective from 18th February 1984.APPENDIX II ]
298@ [G O(P) No. 758/1984/Fin., Dated  22/12/1984]
! [G O(P) No. 107/1985/Fin., Dated 22/02/1985]
† [G O(P) No. 849/1986/Fin., Dated 29/11/1986]
~ [G O(P) No. 16/1987/Fin., Dated  06/01/1987]
*[G O(P) No. 403/1988/Fin., Dated 07/06/1988]
**[G O(P) No. 794/1992/Fin., Dated 31/10/1992]
# [G O(P)No. 925/1995/Fin., Dated 01/12/1995]APPENDIX II ]
74.         @ Director of Rehabilitation
Effective from 6th March 1984.
75.          ! Professor-cum-Project Officer, Post Graduate Centre in Ayurveda
Effective from 27th December 1983.
76.         † Special Representative, Kerala House, New Delhi.
Effective from 13th June 1984.
77.         ~ Chairman, Water Appellate Authority
This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from2
nd July 1979.
*78.       Tribunal for Disciplinary Proceedings, Trivandrum.
*79.       Enquiry Commissioner and Special Judge, Trivandrum.
*80.       Enquiry Commissioner and Special Judge, Thrissur.
               * Effective  from 10th February 1987.
81.         ** The University Appellate Tribunal, Thiruvananthapuram.
Effective  from 15th December 1987.
82.          # Director, Kerala Urban Development Project.
Effective  from 22nd December 1992.KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
299# [Inserted G O(P) No. 632/2010/Fin., Dated 25/11/2010 (with effect from 07/02/2007)]KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
! [G O(P) No. 955/1995/Fin., Dated  06/12/1995]
† [G O(P) No. 985/1997/Fin., Dated  04/11/1997]83.          ! Director, Higher Secondary Education.
Effective  from 19th March 1994.
84.      † State Librarian, Trivandrum Public Library.
            Effective  from 9th March 1988.
85.      # Land Use Commissioner
       Note .- In the case of officers who are not subordinates to any of the above
heads of departments, questions which call for disposal by heads ofdepartments should be referred to the Secretary to Government in thedepartment concerned.APPENDIX II ]
300APPENDIX  III
RULES  RELATING  TO  CHARGE  OF  OFFICE
(Referred to in Rule 23 of Part I)
PART I
Charge of Office
1.           Unless for special recorded reasons (which must be of a public nature) the
authority under whose orders the transfer takes place permits or requires itto be made in any  particular case elsewhere, or otherwise, the  charge of anoffice must be made over at its headquarters, both the relieving and therelieved officers being present.
2.           The condition imposed by this rule that both the relieving and the relieved
officers must be present is not enforced in the case of officers who arepermitted to combine vacation or gazetted holidays with leave.
                 (a)   When they are prefixed to leave the outgoing officer will report, before
leaving headquarters, or if for urgent reasons the leave is granted
during vacation, or holidays, as soon as it is granted that he makes
over charge with effect from the end of the vacation or holidays.  Therelieving officer will then take over charge at the end of the vacation orholidays in the ordinary way.
                 (b)   When they are affixed to leave the officer to be relieved will make over
charge in the ordinary way before the vacation or holidays, the incomingofficer on return at the end of the vacation or holidays, taking overcharge with effect from the beginning of the  vacation or holidays.
3.         The headquarters of any other officer is either the station which has been
declared to be his headquarters by the authority which appoints him, or, inthe absence of such declaration, the station where the records  of his officeare kept.APPENDIX III ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
301PART II
Leaving  Jurisdiction
                   1.    No officer (other than a Police Officer acting within his legal powers) is
entitled to pay or allowances for any time he may spend beyond the
limits of his charge without proper authority.
                   2.    Heads of Departments and Heads of Offices may authorise any officer or
subordinate under their control to proceed on duty beyond the limits of
his charge but within their own jurisdiction.
                    3.   The sanction of Government is required for any officer  proceeding
beyond the limits of the State.
               Ruling
            This rule will not be applicable to a case where an Officer is summoned to
attend a court outside the State.  He should, however, inform his controlling
officer before he leaves station.KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II APPENDIX III ]
302APPENDIX   IV
RULES  REGULATING  GRANT  OF  SPECIAL  PAY
AND  COMPENSATORY  ALLOWANCES
[Referred to in Rule 12 (31) and Rule 44 of Part I]
            In the service rules  provision is made for grant of special  pay [Rule 12
(31), Part I] and compensatory allowances (Rule 44, Part I).
              The additional pay and allowances granted to officers under these rules
will be sub-divided into the following classes:-
              Class          I       (a)  Special  pay in lieu of higher time scale of pay                                         (b)  Special pay for specifically arduous nature of work                  Class            II         Special pay for work in addition to the normal duties attached
to  the post
            
   †This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st
July 1968.
              Class         III     [Deleted]              Class         IV      Mofussil (Compensatory allowance) hill stations              Class         V       *Class V: Deleted              Class         VI      Miscellaneous (compensatory allowance)
          Class I.- Special pay in this class are assigned to posts to which special
responsibility is attached or which involve work of a specially difficult andarduous nature.  No special pay of this class will be granted unless theparticular duties for which an allowance is claimed so far differ, in kind or in
intensity, from those for the performance of which the service in questionwas recruited, as to justify a special remuneration.
†[G O(P) No. 393/1975/Fin., Dated 30/08/1975]
* [G O(P) No. 252/2002/Fin., Dated  25/04/2002]APPENDIX IV ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
303* [G O(P) No. 615/1964/Fin., Dated  31/08/1964]KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
              Class II.-  The cardinal rule which the Government have adopted is that
every officer to whom a variety of duties is assigned or to whose post a
number of duties is attached should carry out those duties without extraremuneration unless they involve more than a  reasonable days work.  Inthis respect Government are merely giving effect to Rule 14, Part I.
                If the volume of work assigned to an officer is more than a full day’s
work the most suitable course is either to increase the staff, shouldthe amount of work, justify a fresh whole time appointment, or toredistribute the work among the members of the sanctioned staff.Special pay in this class will be granted only when neither of thesealternatives is possible.
               The grant of a special pay under this class will be restricted to cases which
strictly satisfy the following test :-
                 If the duties are of a kind outside the normal duties of the service, is in  addition
to the normal work of the service, which the performance of these duties involvereally so material as to justify the grant of a separate  remuneration in order tosecure the contended discharge of those duties by the staff.
  Note .- The allowance sanctioned to the Typists and Stenographers with
higher qualification in Typewriting and Shorthand,  as the case maybe, shall however be treated as ‘Special pay’ falling under this class.
              
 Government Decision No. 1
                 *The Supervisory allowance of ````` 15 per mensem sanctioned to Head Typists
in the scale of pay of Upper Division Typist will be classified as Class II
Special Pay under Appendix IV , Kerala Service Rules.APPENDIX IV ]
304†[G O(P) No. 150/1958/Fin., Dated 23/06/1958  and
   G O(P)  No. 825/1964/Fin., Dated 28/12/1964]
# [G O(P) No. 576/1975/Fin., Dated  27/12/1975]
*, ! [G O(P) No. 159/1981/Fin., Dated  09/03/1981]APPENDIX IV ]
               Government Decision No. 2
              †The Supervisory allowance of ````` 15 per mensem sanctioned to Head Clerks
and Head Accountants will be classified as special pay under Appendix IV ,Kerala Service Rules.
               Class III.- [Deleted]              Class IV .-  The localities which have been recognised as hilly to justify
special compensatory allowance are:-
                   1.    Portions of Devicolom, Peermade, Udumbanchola, Pathanamthitta,
Pathanapuram, Nedumangad and Neyyattinkara Taluks referred toin para 1, under ‘A Class I Tracts’ in Appendix IX.
             
         # This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with  effect
from 2nd February 1970.
                  2.    The hill stations of Chalakudy and Trichur referred to in Appendix IX.
                  3.    *Omitted with effect from 9th March 1981.
                 4.    The Wayanad and Attapady Valley.
                   Compensatory allowance as specified below shall be granted to officers
stationed in the hill stations specified above.
              5.   ! The area comprising the whole of Idukki Village and the portions of
Velliamattom and Arakulam Village in Thodupuzha Taluk having theboundaries specified as item 6 under the heading “A Class I Tracts” inAppendix IX.KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
305                            * Class                                                           Rate of compensatory
allowance per month
              Officers whose salary is upto and including ````` 800                          60
              Officers whose salary is above ````` 800 but below ````` 1,500                80
              Officers whose salary is ````` 1,500 and above                         100
  Explanation  :(1) The salary referred to in this paragraph means the salary
drawn in the scale of pay as revised on or after 1st July, 1983.
                         (2) In the case of those who have opted to remain in the pre-
revision scale of pay, the salary for the purpose ofdetermining the compensatory allowance shall be calculatedby adding to the pay in the pre-revision scale, the dearness
allowance admissible at 488 points indicated in Appendix –
II to pay revision G.O. (P) 515/85/Fin., dated 16
th September
1985, which was merged in  the pay, with effect from 1st July
1983.
                                *Effective from 1st July 1985.
              Ruling
             # The term “Salary” denotes “pay” as defined in Rule 12 (23), Kerala Service
Rules, Part I.
                This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st
January 1966.
              Class V .- deleted**.
* [G O(P) No. 1109/1987/Fin., Dated  23/12/1987]
# [G O(P) No. 72/1972/Fin., Dated 09/03/1972]
**[Deletion G O(P) No. 252/2002/Fin., Dated 25/04/2002]KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
                        This item shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from
9th March 1981.APPENDIX IV ]
306               Class VI.- Miscellaneous.-  The allowances admissible under this class
are  (a) Uniform allowance, (b) Dhobi allowance (c)  Allowance to Medicalmen to compensate for loss of private practice, (d) Security Allowance,(e)  Allowance for higher qualification (f) Allowances granted to officersdeputed for training and (g) Other compensatory allowances.
 Note .-  In cases where the period of training exceeds three months,
compensatory allowance will be granted to the different classes ofofficers deputed for training outside the State at the following rates,namely:-
@ [Substitutions G O(P) No. 62/2006/Fin., Dated 07/02/2006]   @  Category of Officers Rates for
cities of  New
Delhi, Mumbai
and Kolkata
(Per month)
`````Rates for other
Places
(Per month)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
`````
(1) (2) (3)
              Officers of the First Grade  900 750
              Officers of the Second Grade:
             (a)   Officers whose actual pay is
````` 7,500 and above but below
````` 9000800 650
             (b)   Officers whose actual pay is
````` 4800 and above but below
````` 7500650 525
              Officers of the Third Grade 575 425
              Officers of the Fourth Grade 525 350APPENDIX IV ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
307                This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 3rd
March 2004
               Government Decision No.1
                * Special pay granted under Classes I and II, Rule 4 of the Madras Manual of
Special Pay and Allowances to officers governed by the Fundamental Rules
(Madras) should be treated, after their option to Kerala Service Rules as
special pay Classes I and II respectively under Appendix IV , Kerala ServiceRules.
               Government Decision No. 2
          
      † The various allowance mentioned below will be classified as shown against
each:-
* [Circular No. 38373/RB3/61/Fin., Dated 19/09/1961]
† [G O(P) No. 576/1963/Fin., Dated  07/11/1963]Allowance Classification
               1.   Post-Graduate allowance Special pay under Class II
            2.   Allowance to Medical Officers for
visiting bi-weekly Dispensaries     Conveyance allowance under
Class V
               3.   Project Allowance Compensatory allowance under
Class IV
               4.   Hill tract allowance Compensatory allowance under
Class IV
               5.   Headmaster’s allowance Class II Special pay
                 6.    Teaching allowance (to non-clinical
staff  of Medical Colleges)Compensatory allowance for loss of
private practice under Class VI (c)
        7.    Allowance for part time work :KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II APPENDIX IV ]
308        i)  Allowance given to Assistant
Surgeons for taking classes inAuxiliary Midwife’s Nurse’sTraining
       ii)  Allowance given for part-time
Lecturers in the Ayurveda College
           iii)   Allowance given for taking classes
in B.D.S. Course.
       iv)  Allowance for taking classes in
D.M.S. Course.
       v)  Allowance for taking classes in
Extension Training Centres.
       vi)  Allowance for taking classes in
Industrial Training Centres
        vii)   Allowance for taking classes in
Dental Hygienic Course.
      viii)  Allowance given to Doctors for
visiting Hostels.
        ix)   Allowance given to Doctors for
visiting College of PhysicalEducation. 
  Compensatory allowance under
Class VI (c)
        x)  Allowance given to Doctors for
visiting Police Training School aspart-time Medical Officer
        xi)  Allowance given to Doctors for
visiting Raj Bhavan Dispensary
       xii)  Allowance given to Doctors for
visiting School of Optometry 
Conveyance allowance under
Class VAPPENDIX IV ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
309               Government Decision No. 3
         *The Special Allowance Sanctioned to the Police Personnel and the
corresponding categories in the  Fire Force, Prison, Forest, Excise and Vigilance
Department will be classified as compensatory  allowance under Class VI.The personnel on deputation to the Departments, Public Sector undertakings
etc. will not be entitled to the special allowance.  But it will be admissible
during  periods of  leave with allowance for a maximum period of 4 months.
*[G O(P) No. 246/1981/Fin., Dated  21/04/1981]KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II APPENDIX IV ]
310APPENDIX  IV  A
RULES  REGULATING  THE  GRANT  OF  OVERTIME
ALLOWANCE  TO  THE  STAFF  OF  DEPARTMENTS
DURING  SESSIONS  OF  THE  LEGISLATIVE
ASSEMBLY
(Vide Rule 14, Part I)
1.            *The allowance will be given to such of the staff in the following departments
who are required to sit for overtime duty during the sessions of the Legislative
Assembly at the rates sanctioned by Government by general or special ordersissued from time to time subject to the conditions specified in Rules 2 to 6:-
                 (i)   Stationery Department
                (ii)   Legislature Secretariat
              (iii)    Law Department
               (iv)   Public Relations Department
              †(v)     Radio Electrical, Civil, Mechanical and Electronics wings of the  Public
Works Department.
             #(vi)    Health  Clinic, Legislator’s Hostel and the personnel deputed from the
Medical College, Thiruvananthapuram and the Health Services
Department.
             (vii)    Police Department.
            (viii)     Fire Force Department.
           This Rule shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 28
th
March, 1983.
2.            A person will be eligible for overtime allowance only if he has been on duty
on a working day for a minimum period of two hours before 10 a.m. or after
*[G O(P) No.157/1983/Fin., Dated 28/03/1983]
[†Substitution, # Insertion G O(P) No. 70/2010/Fin., Dated 16/02/2010
 (with effect from 16/02/2010)]APPENDIX IV A ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
3115.00 p.m. or for a minimum period of 3 hours on an intervening holiday during
the Assembly Session.
3.              Such members of the staff whose presence may be necessary in the interests
of work shall be specifically required in writing by the Head of Department/Office or by his immediate subordinate Gazetted Officer to attend office
earlier and/or to stay longer or to attend office on holiday.  Only individuals
who have been so directed will be eligible for overtime allowance.
4.          The following certificate will be signed by the drawing officer in the bills
claiming overtime allowance -
                 “Certified that Sri……………. ………….. was required under specific orders
to sit late in office/to attend office early on……………………..or to attend
office on Sunday/……………………….holiday and was detained from.………
……a.m to ………………….. a.m./p.m………………..to ……………….p.m. fordisposal of urgent work relating to the Legislative Assembly.
          Also certified that the amount claimed by Sri……………………..is in
accordance  with the rates prescribed in the rules in Appendix IV A of theKerala Service Rules.”
5.               Members of the staff who are eligible for allowance in accordance with these
rules will not be eligible for any other additional remuneration, conveyance/hire charges or compensation leave for the performance of the same duties.
6.       The allowance  will be classified as ‘honorarium’ and will be drawnin
establishment/salary bills.  In the case of Gazetted Officers, the allowancewill be authorised by the Accountant General on certificates furnished by
the  Head of Department/Office or by his immediate subordinate  Gazetted
Officer.
7.              A register showing details of overtime work done, allowance paid therefore,
etc., will be maintained in Form No. 14.
               *Effective from 11
th June 1963.
*[G O(P) No. 602/1963/Fin., Dated  02/12/1963]KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II APPENDIX IV A ]
312*[G O(P) 570/1978/Fin., Dated. 11/07/1978]APPENDIX  V
LIST  OF  RECOGNISED  *TUBERCULOSIS,  LEPROSY  AND  CANCER
INSTITUTIONS  AND  MENTAL  HOSPITALS  FOR  PURPOSES
OF  GRANT  OF  EXTRA ORDINARY  LEA VE  TO  OFFICERS
NOT  IN  PERMANENT  EMPLOY
(Referred to in Note 3 under Rule 90 of Part I)
PART I
Tuberculosis  Institutions
(a)          Within Kerala
1. K.V . Sanatorium, Mulankunnathukavu
2. T.B.  Sanatorium, Pariyaram
3. T.B.  Centre, Trivandrum.
4. T.B.  Hospital, Pulayanarkottah.
5. T.B.  Clinic, Palluruthy
6. Do.              Kottayam.
7. Do.              Trichur
8. Do.              Kozhikkode
9. T.B. Seal Ward, Alleppey
10. Do.             Ayyampally
11. Do.             Alwaye
12. Do.             Palluruthy
13. Do.             Chittoor.
14. T.B. Clinic, Alleppey
15.  Do.             Karunagappally
16. Do.              PalghatAPPENDIX V ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
31317.        Do.            Muvattupuzha
18.        Do.            Cannanore
19.        Do.            Kozhencherry
20.        Do.            Kottarakkara
21.        T.B. Clinic,  Karuvatta
22.        T.B. diagnostic Centre, Quilon
23.        T.B. Isolation Ward, District Hospital, Palghat.
24.        Do.             Cannanore
25.        Do.              Government Hospital, Chirayinkil
26.        T.B. Seal Ward, Muvattupuzha
27.        Do.             Palai
28.        Do.             Chengannur
29.        Do.             Kozhencherry
30.        Do.             Chalakkudy
31.        Do.             Mavelikkara
32.        Do.             Changanacherry
33.        Do.             Mannarghat
(b)       Outside Kerala
1.          Madar Union Sanatorium, Madar, Ajmer, Merwara.
2.          Reid Provincial Sanatorium, Shillong
3.          Municipality Tuberculosis Hospital, Civil and Military Station, Bangalore.
4.          Government Tuberculosis Sanatorium, Bangalore Cantt.
5.          S.B. Dey Sanatorium, Kurseong
6.         Jadabpur Tuberculosis Hospital, Jadabpur
7.          Itki Sanatorium, Itki.KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II APPENDIX V ]
3148.            Turner Sanatorium, Bhoiwada Hill, Parel, Bombay.
9.            The Bel-Air Sanatorium, Delkeith, Panchgani
10.          Hillside Sanatorium, Gengurla
11.          The Salvation Army Tuberculosis Hospital,  Anand, District Kaira
12.          Wanless Tuberculosis Sanatorium, Wanlesswadi, District Satara
13.          Pendra Road Sanatorium, Pendra Road, Madhya Pradesh
14.          The Nagpur Tuberculosis Clinic, New Delhi
15.          Silver Jubilee Tuberculosis Hospital, Kingsway, Delhi
16.          The New Delhi Tuberculosis Clinic, New Delhi
17.         Union Mission Tuberculosis Sanatorium, Arogyavaram.
18.          Visrantipuram Sanatorium, Rajamundry
19.          Government Tuberculosis Sanatorium, Tambaram, Madras.
20.          Coimbatore District Jubilee Tuberculosis Sanatorium, Perundurai
21.         Government Tuberculosis Hospital, Royapettah, Madras City.
22.          The King Edwrd Sanatorium, Dharombur (Simla Hills)
23.          Lady Irwin Tuberculosis Sanatorium, Jubar
24.          Lady Linlithgow Sanatorium, Kassuli
25.          Raj Bahadur Sir Gujarmal Kesradevi Tuberculosis Sanatorium, Amritsar
26.          King Edward VII Sanatorium, Bhowali.
27.         Tuberculosis Clinic attached to the Calcutta Medical College, Calcutta.
28.          Shree Padmavatidevi Sanatorium, Baroda City.
29.          Ganga Golden Jubilee Tuberculosis Dispensary and Hospital, Bikaner
30.          Tuberculosis Hospital, Lingamapalli, Hyderabad.
31.          Princes Krishna Jammanni Sanatorium, Mysore City
32.         Tuberculosis Hospital, Nagercoil, Madras StateAPPENDIX V ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
315KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
33. Tuberculosis Government Hospital, Kanchrapra
34. The Tuberculosis Department of the Government Headquarters Hospital,
Trichinopoly.
35. Rajaji Tuberculosis Sanatorium, Trichinopoly
36. Santosham Memorial Tuberculosis Sanatorium, Tambaram, Madras.
37. The Municipal Tuberculosis Dispensary, Civil and Military Station, Bangalore
38. The Kasturba Tuberculosis Clinic and Hospital, Lucknow.
39. Government Tuberculosis Institute, Madras
40. Government Headquarters Hospital, Coimbatore
41. Government Headquarters Hospital, Tanjore
42. Government Erskine Hospital, Mathurai
43. Government King George Hospital, Visakhapatnam.
44. Government General Hospitals, Madras.
45. Government Wellesley Tuberculosis Sanatorium, Bellary.
46. Telegaon General Hospital and Convalescent Home, Telegaon (Dabhade—
District Poona)
47.           Victoria Jubilee Hospital, Amritsar
48. King George Medical College Hospital, Lucknow.
49. Patna Medical College Hospital
50.           Tuberculosis Clinic, Jubbulpoor
51.           Tuberculosis clinic, Queens Road, Delhi
52. Ramakrishna Mission Free Tuberculosis Clinic, Karol Bagh, Delhi
53. Group of Hospital for Tuberculosis, Bombay
54. Central T.B. Clinic, Kanpur
55. Hospital for Diseases of the Chest Camp, Aundh, PoonaAPPENDIX V ]
316APPENDIX V ]
56. K.M.R. Bangu T.B. Sanatorium, Digri, Midnapur
57. Government T.B. Clinic, Mandi
58. Himachal Pradesh Sanatorium, Mandhodhar, Near Dharambur
59. Karnataka Health Institute, Hospital and Sanatorium, Ghataprabha (Belgaum
District)
60. V .C. Nath T. B. Sanatorium, Bharatpur
61. Ramakrishna Mission T.B. Sanatorium, Ranchi (Bihar)
62. Sriram Chandra Bhanji Medical College Hospital, Cuttack
63. T.B. Sanatorium, Dakpathan (District Dehra Dum)
64. T.B. Sanatorium, Jaipur
65. T.B. Clinic, Jodhpur
66.           M.G. Hospital, Jodhpur
67. T.B. Hospital, Iramumna
68. T.B. Sanatorium, Vikarabad (Anathgiri)
69. T.B. Clinic, Dapirpura.
70. T.B. Clinic, Patiala, Punjab
71. Hardinge Sanatorium, Dharampur (Simla Hills)
72. K.J. Mehta T.B. Hospital, Amargadh (via. Songadh), Bombay
73. T.B. Ward, J.A. Hospital, Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh
74. T.B. Wards, M.T. Hospital, Indore, Madhya Pradesh
75. T.B. Sanatorium, Rao Indore, Madhya Pradesh
76. S.D.S. Sanatorium, Bangalore
77. T.B. Clinic, Allahabad
78.            The Coimbatore Tuberculosis Sanatorium, Peelamedu P.O., Avanashi Road,
Coimbatore
79. Lala Ram Sarup Tuberculosis Hospital, Mehrauli (Delhi)KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
317KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
80. Rocky Mount Sanatorium, Ara P.G . Mankum (near Ranchi)
81.            Mahatma Gandhi Memorial T.B. Sanatorium, Sangipa, Tanjore District
82. Medical Ward (T.B.) attached to the R.G. Ker Medical College Hospital,
Calcutta
83.     T.B. Hospital, Uditnarayanbur (near Bhowani, Patna, Orissa)
84.     Brij Sewa Samiti T.B. Sanatorium, Vrindaban (Mathura)
85.           The Government Welfare Fund T.B. Hospital, Nellore (Andhra)
86. Bhabendra Bala Chest Clinic, Serampore (West Bengal)
87. T.B. Clinic, Chemba
88. C.D. Hospital, Srinagar
89. C.D. Hospital, Jammu
PART II
Leprosy Institutions
(a)           Within Kerala
1.             Leprosy Sanatorium, Noornad
2. Leprosy Sanatorium, Koratty
3. Leprosy Treatment Centre, Kayamkulam
4. Leprosy Treatment Centre, Haripad
5. Leprosy Subsidiary Centre, Ponnani
6. Leprosy Subsidiary Centre, Baliapatam
7. Mission Leprosy Sanatorium, Chevayur
8. The Poor Home Society Leprosy Home, Kozhikkode.
b)           Outside Kerala
1.            Bethesad Leprosy Hospital, Nerespur, West Godavary District
2.             The Salvation Army Leprosy Hospital, Babatla, Guntur DistrictAPPENDIX V ]
318APPENDIX V ]
3.           Leprosy Hospital, Keserapalla, Krishna District
4.           Leprosy Hospital, Salure, Srikakulam District
5.           Leprosy Home, Vizianagram,  Vishakapatnam District
6.           Leprosy Home and Hospital, Ramachandrapuram (East Godavari District)
7.           A.L.C. Mission Leprosy Hospital, Kodur, Cuddapah District
8.           Leprosy Clinic, Karwan
9.           Leprosy Hospital, Dichpally
10.         Leprosy Colony, Zeheerbad
11.         Leprosy Colony, Narayanpet
12.         Santipara Leprosy Colony, P.O. Bengaingaon (Goalpara District)
13.         Christian Leprosy Colony, P.O. Barpheta, Jorhat
14.         Seldeha Leper Colony (Santhal Parganas)
15.         The Acworth Leprosy Home and Clinic, Vadaia Bombay No.31
16.         The Leprosy Hospital, Sholapur
17.         The Sasson Hospital, Poona (O.P.D.)
18.         The Leprosy Hospital, Polarpur (District Kolaba)
19.         The Anti-Leprosy Clinic, Ambewadi South, Satara District
20.         The Shenda Park Leprosy Colony, Kolhapur
21.         The Kegrapeth Leprosy Hospital, Ahmedabad
22.         Leprosy Colony, Osmanbad
23.         Kothara Leprosy Home, P.O. Achalpur (District Amarvathi)
24.         Jagadamba Kustha Nivar, Amarvati
25.         Dattabur Leprosy Colony, P.O. Nalwadi (District Wardha)
26.         Leprosy Colony, Warora, District Chanda.
27.         Isolation  Colony, Kashikhed P.O., Dhamangaon,, District Amarvati
28.         Leper Asylum, Adhewada, BhavangarKERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
319KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
29.          Leper Clinic, Punagadh
30.          Government Leprosy Hospital, Schore
31.          Leprosy Home, Banganga, Indore
32. Leprosy Home, Ujjain
33. Leprosy Home, Rajgarah
34. Henderson Memorial Leper Home, Dhar
35.           Chandkhuri Leprosy Home and Hospital, P.O. Baitapur (District Bilaspur)
36. Bethesda Leprosy Asylum, Champa (District Bilaspur)
37. Shantipur Leprosy Asylum, P.O.  Shantipur (District Rajpur)
38. Rajnandgaon Leprosy Home and Clinic, District Durg
39. Government Leprosy  Home and Hospital,  Raipur
40. Brehepada Leprosy colony, Narayanapur (District Bastar)
41. Chittalanka Leprosy Colony, Dartewara, (District Bastar)
42. Government Lady Willingdon Leprosy Sanatorium, Tirumani, Chingelput
43. Government Children’s Leprosy Sanatorium, Madras.
44. St. Mary’s Leprosy Hospital, Kumbakonam (Tanjore District)
45. Dayapuram Leprosy Hospital and Home, Manamadura (Ramanad District)
46.          Kasturba Gandhi Kusta Nivarana Nilayam, Mazhavanthangal (South Arcot
District)
47. St. Joseph’s Leprosy Home, Tuticorin  (Tirunelveli District)
48. Government Leprosy Treatement Unit, Tirukoilur  Leprosy Colony, Imphal.
49. Government Leper Asylum, Magadi  Road, Bangalore.
50. The Silver Jubilee Leprosy Hospital, Sankeshwar (District Belgaum)
51. The Leprosy Hospital, Hindaalgi (District Belgaum)
52. St.Josheph’s Leprosy Hospital and Asylum, Kankaredy (South Kanara
District)APPENDIX V ]
320APPENDIX V ]
53. Leprosy Home and Hospital, Cuttack
54. Leprosy Asylum, Baripada
55. Leprosy Hospital, Subatu
56. Leprosy Home, Palampur (Kangra District)
57. Leprosy Clinic attached to V .M. Hospital, Agart
58. Naini Leprosy Hospital and Home, Naini (Allahabad)
59. Leprosy Hospital under the Gandhi Memorial and Associated Hospital,
Lucknow
60. Maclaren Leper Hospital, Dehradun
61.            Srimati Bhagwan Dei Leper Hospital, Kanpur
62. Leprosy Home and Hospital,  Almora
63. Leprosy Home and Hospital, Chaudag, Almora District
64. Skin and V .D. Dept., S.N. Hospital, Agra
65. Leprosy Home and Hospital, Zamuratgang, Faizabad
66. Skin Dispensary, K.E. Hospital, Banares
67. The State Leper Hospital, Baharaich
68. Gouripore Leprosy Colony, Bankura
69. Leprosy Home, Bankura
70. Silda Leprosy Clinic, Midnapure
71. Griffiths Leprosy Colony, Midnapur
72. Municipal Charitable Leprosy Clinic, Burdwan
73. Asansol Leprosy Settlement, Asansol
74. Raniganj Leprosy Home, Burdwan District
75. Krishnagar Leprosy Clinic, Nadia District
76.           Leprosy Clinic, HowrahKERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
321*[G O (P) 65/2007/Fin., Dated 19/02/2007]KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
77. Behrampore Leprosy Clinic, Murshidabad District
78. Kalimpong Leprosy Colony, Darjeeling District
79. Alber Victor Leprosy Hospital, Calcutta
80. Leprosy Outpatient Dept., School of Tropical Medicine, Calcutta
81. Premananda Leprosy Clinic, Maniktala
82. Premananda Leprosy Clinic, Kalighat
83. Sriniketan Leprosy Clinic, Birhum District
84. Purutia Leper Asylum (Manbhum District)
                 *APPENDIX VI (Omitted)APPENDIX V ]
322APPENDIX VII
RULES  RELATING  TO  CASUAL  LEAVE
(Referred to in Rule 111 of Part I)
1.            Casual leave is not provided for in the rules as it is not recognised as leave.
Technically therefore an officer on casual leave is not treated as absent from
duty and his pay and allowances are not intermitted.  The grant of suchleave need not be reported to the Audit Officer, nor is it necessary for the
officer to submit charge certificates when he proceeds on or returns from
casual leave.
2.             * (i)    No officer may in any case be absent on casual leave for  more than
twenty days in the course of one calendar year.  But the members of
the teaching staff of educational institutions shall be eligible forcasual leave only for fifteen days in a calendar year.
              * (ii)    All officers including teaching staff of educational institutions may
be allowed to combine casual leave with Sundays and otherauthorised holidays provided that the resulting  period of absencefrom duty shall not exceed fifteen days at a stretch. The fact that a
maximum has been fixed for the amount of casual leave which may
be taken within a year, does not mean that an officer is entitled totake the full amount of casual leave as a matter of course.
  
†Exception:- The maximum period of absence combining casual leave with
Sundays  and other authorised holidays will be twenty days at a stretchfor the State Government employees working in New Delhi.
               (iii)    All officers including those who have put in less than a year’s service
will be allowed casual leave at the rate of  20 days during a year withouttaking into account the length of service put in by them subject to the
discretion of the sanctioning authority :
*[GO(P) No. 648/1978/Fin., Dated  24/08/1978]
†[G O(P) No. 51/1989/Fin., Dated  30/01/1989]APPENDIX VII ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
323              *Provided that the teaching staff of educational institutions may be granted
casual leave for fifteen days only during a year.
               † The amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st
January 1970.
3.           An officer requiring casual leave should take the orders of the head of his
office for such absence.  When the head of an office requires casual leave,he may take the leave and report the fact to his immediate superior authority.
Heads of Departments should intimate their intention of taking casual leave
to Government in the department concerned.  In cases in which the casualleave is intended to be spent outside the jurisdiction of  the officer, the
previous sanction of the competent authority should be obtained.
4.           
 # A Casual Leave Register shall be maintained in every office in !Form No.19.
When an Officer is transferred from one department/ office/section to another,
the Controlling Officer of the former shall forward the extract of Casual Leave
Register pertaining to the Officer, duly authenticated, to the latter.  No Officershall be granted further casual leave during the rest of the calendar year
before getting the above extract.
5.                 (i)     An officer may be allowed causal leave for half a day at his request,
provided that casual leave for half a day shall not be granted to thestaff of the department of Museums and Zoos who work in shifts.
             ** (ii)    Casual leave for half a day at a time may be granted to the technical
staff of  Government presses who have to work in the first shift that
*[G O(P) No. 622/1979/Fin., Dated 19/07/1979]
†[G O(P) No. 844/1970/Fin., Dated  05/12/1970]
#[Substitution G O(P) No.637/2010/Fin., Dated  25/11/2010 (with effect  from 25/11/2010)]
![Substitution G O(P) No. 465/2012/Fin., Dated 17/08/2012 (with effect from 17/08/2012)]
**[G O(P) No. 505/1977/Fin., Dated 07/12/1977]KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II APPENDIX VII ]
324is from 8 a.m. to  4.30 p.m. with a  noon  interval of one hour between
1 p.m. and 2 p.m..  In respect  of the second shift half day casual
leave may be allowed only for the second half of the shift that isfrom 9 to 11.30 p.m.
6.       
 † Casual leave cannot ordinarily be taken in combination with any leave
recognised by the rules, with joining time or with vacation. Heads ofDepartments may, however, sanction such combination in special cases,
provided there is no evasion of rules,  for instance, when an officer obliged
to be absent owing to the prevalence of infectious disease in his residenceand placed on special casual leave, himself contracts the illness and has to
be granted regular leave in continuation.
7.          Casual leave, not being recognised as leave, cannot be retrospectively
commuted into any other kind of leave, but when an officer who proceeded
on casual leave under the ordinary circumstances takes some other kind
of leave in continuation, such leave will be held to have commenced fromthe date on which he proceeded on casual leave.
8.            Deleted
S
ECTION  II
SPECIAL  CASUAL  LEA VE
1.           Special Casual leave not counted against ordinary causal leave may be
granted to an officer in the  following circumstances :
                   (i)   When he is ordered by the head of his office to absent himself from
duty on the certificate of a medical officer or sanitary authority onaccount of the presence of infectious disease in his residence
*provided no substitute is appointed and no extra cost to
Government is involved. If, however, a substitute is necessary,
ordinary leave debitable to the leave account of the officer should be
†[G O(P) No. 863/1978/Fin., Dated 18/12/1978]
*[G O(P) No. 164/1974/Fin., Dated  17/07/1974   with effect from 01/03/1997]APPENDIX VII ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
325granted. The grant of special casual leave involving the appointment
of substitute in all other cases requires the sanction of  Government;
which will be accorded only when the absence is for less than 30 daysand the subordinate concerned draws a pay of less than * ````` 16180 per
mensem, and has no ordinary leave to his credit. This amendment
shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1
st July
2009.
                Note 1 .-  When the officer himself catches the infection, regular leave under
the rules must be taken for the period of absence.
  Note 2 .- The following diseases are treated as infectious diseases for the
purpose  of the grant of special casual leave:-
            1)     Smallpox
            2)    † Deleted
            3)     Plague
            4)     Cholera
            5)     Typhoid
            6)     Acute influenzal Pneumonia
            7)     Diphtheria
            8)     Cerebro-spinal meningitis
   Note 3 .- Leave under this head shall not ordinarily be granted for a period
exceeding 21 days, but in exceptional cases it may be granted upto 30
days.
    Note  4 .-  Special casual leave taken in any circumstances may be allowed to
be combined with ordinary leave or ordinary casual leave.
* [Substitution G O(P) No. 406/2013/Fin., Dated  27/08/2013]
† [G O(P) No. 189/1976/Fin., Dated  05/07/1976]KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  & II APPENDIX VII ]
326  * Note 5 .- The heads of offices will also be eligible for special casual leave
under the Rules.
          (ii)  When he is summoned to serve as a juror or assessor or to give
evidence  before a court as a witness in civil or criminal cases inwhich his private interests are not in issue, the leave to cover the
total period  absence necessary.
             (iii)   When he is permitted to attend the meetings of a University, or to
undertake any other work connected with a University, leave to
cover the period of absence from duty.
          But if he takes up examinership in University Examination and accepts
remuneration at the instance of Government, his absence will be treated as
duty and if the work is not taken at the instance of Government, he will have
to  avail himself of eligible leave.
  # Note .-  In the case of University examinations conducted by the Universities
in Kerala, the examinership offered by one University to the teaching
staff of colleges under another University and accepted by them will
be treated as taking up examinership at the instance of Government forthe purpose of this rule.
  This Note shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 18
th
February 1981.
             (iv)  When he is bitten by a rabid animal, or if it becomes necessary to
undergo anti-rabic treatment due to infection during  post-mortem
examination or other similar causes, leave to cover the actual periodrequired for treatment (14 days) and for the journeys to and from
the nearest anti-rabic treatment centre.
*[G O(P) No. 164/1974/Fin., Dated 17/07/1974]
# [G O(P) No. 167/1982/Fin., Dated  06/04/1982]                (v)    [Deleted]APPENDIX VII ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
327          (vi)  When an officer in the last grade is temporarily incapacitated on
account of typhoid and cholera inoculation leave for one day.
*(vii)    (a)    A male Government employee who undergoes vasectomy
operation for the first time will be granted special casualleave for a period not exceeding six working days.
Intervening Sundays and closed holidays will be ignored
while calculating the period of special casual leave. Specialcasual leave for a period not exceeding 6 days will be
granted for undergoing vasectomy operation for the second
time also on production of a medical certificate from theprescribed medical authority to the effect that the first
operation was a failure  and that the second operation was
actually performed.
 (b)  A female Government servant  who undergoes sterilisation
operation will be granted special casual leave for a period not
exceeding 14 days :
              Provided that special casual leave for undergoing tubectomy operation
for the second time will be granted only on production of a medical
certificate from the prescribed medical authority to the effect that thefirst operation was a failure and that the second operation was actually
performed.
 (c)  A male Government servant whose wife undergoes a gyno-
sterilisation (tubectomy operation without delivery) will be granted
special casual leave for a period not exceeding 7 days subject toproduction of a medical certificate from the medical officer who
actually performs the operation.
  (d)    An Officer undergoing treatment due to complication arising from
sterilisation operation shall be granted special casual leave to
* [G O(P) No. 381/1983/Fin., Dated  08/07/1983]KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II APPENDIX VII ]
328*[G O(P) No. 381/1983/Fin., Dated  08/07/1983]
†[G O(P) No. 388/1976/Fin., Dated 16/12/1976]           cover the period of such treatment based on the certificate of the
medical authority:
            Provided that if the Government servant is not hospitalised the period of
special casual leave granted will be limited to 7 days in the case of male
officers and 14 days in the case of female officers.
               Ruling
                 Special casual leave under this rule may be combined with holidays provided
that the total period of absence from duty does not exceed ten days.
              (viii)  Women employees who undergo I.U.C.D.  insertion will be granted
special casual leave for the day of insertion.
                         *Special casual leave will be granted on the day of I.U.C.D.—re-insertion
also.
                  (ix)   When an officer as member of a staff council has to attend a meeting of
the council, he will be granted special casual leave for the days required
for the journey from his place of duty to the place of the meeting of the
council and back.
†(x-a)  Special casual leave will be granted to women Government
employees having less than three children for undergoing
medical termination of pregnancy.  The leave shall be grantedonly once in their service and shall be for a period of six days
including the day on which medical termination of pregnancy
is conducted.
*(x-b)   Female Government employees who undergo salpingectomy
operation after Medical Termination of Pregnancy (MTP) may begranted special casual leave for a period not exceeding 14 days.APPENDIX VII ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
329†[G O(P) No. 45/1977/Fin., Dated  01/02/1977]KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PAR T I  &  II
*[G O(P) No. 381/1983/Fin., Dated  08/07/1983]*(x-c)   Male Government employees whose wives undergo tubectomy/
salpingectomy operation after Medical Termination of Pregnancy
(MTP) may be granted   special casual leave upto 7 days subject
to the production of medical certificate stating that their wiveshave undergone tubectomy/salpingectomy operation after
Medical Termination of Pregnancy.  It shall not be  necessary
to state in the certificate that the presence of the Governmentemployee is required to look after the wife during her
convalescence.
                 †(xi)     An officer who is a member of the Indian Institute of Public Administration
may be granted special casual leave to attend any meeting/seminar
organised by the regional or local branch of the said Institute and for the
days required for the journey from their place of duty to the place of
meeting/seminar and back.
        (xii) (i)   A Government officer who has lost all male children or all female
children after vasectomy/tubectomy operation  performed earlier;
may be granted special casual leave for undergoing recanalisation
operation upto a period of 21 days or actual period of hospitalisationas certified by the authorised  medical attendant, whichever is less.
Special casual leave shall also be granted for the minimum journey
period required and spent for the to and fro journey for undergoingthe operation.
               (ii)  The grant of special casual leave shall be subject to the following
conditions, namely:-
    (a)    the operation has been performed in a hospital or  a medical college
or an institution where facilities for recanalisation are available.
  (b)    the request for the grant of special casual leave shall be supported
by a medical certificate from the doctor who performed the
operation to the effect that hospitalisation of the officer for theAPPENDIX VII ]
330*[G O(P) No. 381/1983/Fin., Dated  08/07/1983]
†[G O(P) No. 659/1995/Fin., Dated 10/10/1995]APPENDIX VII ]
period stipulated therein was essential for operation and post
operational recovery.
   (iii)   *The period of absence in excess of the period of special casual
leave as admissible under sub-clause (i) shall be treated as regular
leave of the kind admissible under the leave rules applicable to
the officer or ordinary casual leave as applied for by the officer.
   Note .-  Special casual leave granted under clauses (vii) to (xii) under the
Family Welfare Programme may be suffixed as well as prefixed to regular
leave or casual leave.  However, special casual leave should not be
allowed to be prefixed or suffixed both to regular leave and casualleave.  The intervening holidays and/or Sundays may be prefixed/
suffixed to regular leave, as the case may be.
2.            In the cases coming under clauses (i) to (iii) above, when the absence from
duty exceeds the period which may reasonably be treated as casual leaveunder the discretion vested in the head of the office, the officer may be
granted for the entire period of absence such regular leave with leave salary
as may be due to him and thereafter leave without allowances.  In the casescoming under clause (iv) above the excess over one month of the period of
absence should be treated as regular leave and debited to the leave account
3.  
         † (a)   Special casual leave not exceeding 15 days in one calendar year may
be granted to Government servants who take part in State
Championship conducted by the respective State Associations
within the State and for attending selection trials of State Teams forparticipating in National Championships.
                 (b)   Special Casual leave not exceeding 45 days in one calendar year may be
granted  to Government servants, who take part in National levelchampionships conducted  by All India Associations, for  attending
coaching camps of the State Teams in preparation of participation inKERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
331KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
National Championships and for attending selection trials of National
Teams for participating in International Championships.
               (c)   Special Casual leave not exceeding 90 days in one calendar year may be
granted to Government servants for representing India in InternationalEvents and for attending coaching camps of National Teams in preparationof International Events.
                    (d)     Government officials who are office bearers in the National Federations
or Associations in sports and games and who are members of the KeralaSports Council may be granted special casual leave not exceeding 30days for the days of the meeting and the minimum time required for theto and fro journeys.
               (e)   The period of leave mentioned above shall be independent of one
another and shall be exclusive of Public holidays that may intervene.The period  of absence in excess of the days mentioned above ineach case shall be treated as ordinary leave admissible under relevantleave rules applicable to the Government servants concerned.  Forthis purpose, officers may, as a special case, be permitted to combinespecial casual leave with ordinary leave. Special casual leave shallnot, however, be granted in combination with casual leave.
                 (f)    Special casual leave shall be granted only on production of participation
certificates issued by the respective Associations and it shall be limited tothe actual period of participation, including the shortest transit period,subject to the limits specified above.
            (g)   Government servants whose services are utilised in connection with
coaching or administration of the teams participating in theChampionships/Events mentioned above, may also be treated asmembers of the team for the purpose of grant of special casual leave.APPENDIX VII ]
332  Note .-  The terms ‘State Association’, ‘State Championship’,  ‘All India
Association’, ‘National Level Championship’ and ‘International Meet/Event’ are defined as follows:-
   (i)   State Association:-   A duly constituted body, at the State level in
respect of a particular discipline of sports/games, having districtlevel units as members.  It shall have the recognition of the KeralaSports Council.
  (ii)  State Championship:-   Inter-district or inter-zone championships/
meets of a particular game/sports conducted by the respective Stateassociations at State level.
 (iii)   All India Association:-  A duly constituted national body of a
particular discipline of sports/games, having state level units asmembers. It shall have the recognition of the Government of India.
  (iv)   National Level Championship :- A Championship/meet conducted by
the respective All India Associations at national level in which variousstate teams participate.
 (v)  International Meet/Event :-  Sports/games conducted at
International level in which various nations  take part.  Participationof an Indian team with the approval of Government of India onlyshall be considered as a recognised event.
*[G O(P) No. 98/2002/Fin., Dated  31/01/2002]APPENDIX VII ]
         * (h)  Government Officials who are office bearers of District Sports
Associations and District Sports Councils shall be granted SpecialCasual Leave not exceeding 10 days for attending meetings ofDistrict Sports Associations and Districts Sports Councils.
                          *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force on 5
th January
1999.KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
3334.         When an officer has to insure his life in the State Life Insurance (Official
Branch) he will be given such leave of absence as may be necessary to
enable him to appear before a Medical Officer and to procure the required
certificate.
5.              When volunteers who are Government servants, attend camps or exercises
or attend rifle meetings with the permission of the heads of their departments
or offices, they will be considered to be on special casual leave during theperiod of their absence from duty.
               Government Decision
            *The concessions allowed to ‘volunteers’ in regard to the grant of special
casual leave for attending camps, exercises, rifle meetings, etc., may be
extended to scouters, guiders and  office bearers of the Bharath Scouts and
Guides Association for attending camps, conferences, rallies, etc.
                Effective from 10
th June 1964.
6.            Special casual leave will be allowed to Government servants who have won
certificates of merit in the Lok Sahayak Sena and who are required to
participate in the Republic Day Parade in New Delhi for: (1) a period notexceeding 14 days required for their stay in New Delhi in connection with the
participation in the Republic Day Parade plus (2) the minimum period required
for the journey of the Government servants from headquarters to New Delhiand back.
7.          Special casual leave may be allowed to Doctors and Veterinarians who are
invitee members, official delegates or those who have been asked to readpapers at an All Indian Conference of the Medical or Veterinary Association
or the Indian Science Congress, as the case may be.  The leave will be
granted for attendance at the meeting and for journeys from head quarters tothe place of the meeting and back.
*[G O(P) No. 53/1965/Fin., Dated 05/02/1965]KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II APPENDIX VII ]
334           The power of granting special casual leave under these orders will be
exercised by Heads of Departments and regional and district officers in
the case of officers under their administrative control.  In the case ofHeads of  Departments partaking in sporting events special casual leave
will be granted by Government.
8.            Special casual leave may be granted to Government servants appearing at
departmental promotion examinations which are neither obligatory nor
entail a condition of preferment in Government service (e.g., practical
test for selection of typists in service as Stenographers, selective testfor selection of last grade employees as attenders etc.) to cover the actual
duration of examination concerned plus the minimum period required for
the to and fro journey.  Such special casual leave will not, however, begranted for appearing for the open competitive  examinations held by the
Public Service Commission and cannot be combined with ordinary casual
leave or regular leave.
9.            An accused officer, not under suspension, may be granted special casual leave
to cover the actual period for the onward and return journey for appearingbefore the Disciplinary Proceedings Tribunal and the days of attendance at the
Tribunal.
  Note .- This rule will apply mutatis mutandis to accused officers called upon
to appear before a Disciplinary Authority/Enquiring Authority duly
constituted.
10.           When Government servants enlisted as Home Guards V olunteers are called out
by the Commandants General/Commandants under sections 5 (1) and 5 (2) of
the Kerala Home Guards Act, 1960, for training or to discharge any of the
duties or functions assigned to the Home Guards, they will be  considered  tobe on special causal leave during the period of the their training/duty in
Home Guards plus the minimum period required for the journey from their
headquarters to the place of training/duty and back.APPENDIX VII ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
335             A day’s special casual leave will be allowed every year to Government
servants who are Home Guards V olunteers for participation in thecelebrations of Home Guards Day.
               The detention certificate issued by the Commandant General/Commandants,
Home Guards will be accepted as valid authority for the grant of specialcasual leave.
11.          The period spent in transit by the civil Government servants who are called
out for training in the Defence Reserves, from the date of their relief  from thecivil posts to the date on which they report themselves to the militaryauthorities and vice versa will be treated as special casual leave.
                The period of transit should be limited to actual journey time as laid down in
Note 1 under Rule 125, Part I.
12.          The period of absence (including the period spent in transit) of the members
of the teaching staff of the Medical Colleges, College of Nursing and theDental College, on account of their appointment as Inspectors by the IndianMedical Council, Indian Nursing Council or the Dental Council of India willbe treated as special casual leave, provided they are not paid any remunerationfor the inspection work.
              *Teaching staff of Medical Colleges who are invited by the Indian Medical
Council, Indian Council of Medical Research, All Indian Institute of MedicalSciences, Dental Council of India and Indian Nursing Council as experts forattending board meetings and scientific meetings will be granted specialcasual leave for the days of meetings, including actual time taken for to andfro journeys, provided they are not receiving remuneration from theconcerned Institution. The Principals of the Medical Colleges are authorisedto grant special casual leave in such cases in respect of officers workingunder them.
*[G O (P) No. 215/1982/Fin., Dated 07/05/1982]KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II APPENDIX VII ]
336               *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from
8th June, 1981.
                †Auxiliary Nurse Midwives/Nurses who are members of the Indian Nursing
Council will be granted special casual leave to attend the meetings of theCouncil for the days of the meetings including  actual time taken for to andfro journeys provided they are not receiving remuneration from the Council.The District Medical Officers of Health are authorised to grant special casualleave in such cases in respect of officers working under them.
             †This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect
from 28
th June 1984.
13.        # Ex-servicemen boarded out of service and re-employed  in Government
service in the State, if and when required to appear before the ReserveMedical Boards for the purpose of reassessing their disability, will be grantedspecial casual leave for a maximum period of 15 days  including the timespent in transit both ways.  Special casual leave under this rule may begranted on more than one occasion in a calendar year, if needed.
14.      ! Government servants, who have won gallantry awards and who are
required to participate in the Colour Presentation Ceremonies inconnection with such awards will be granted special casual leave for theperiod of their stay at the place where the ceremony is conducted and theminimum period required for the journey from headquarters to such placeand back, subject to the condition that the total period shall not exceed10 days.
*[G O(P) No. 215/1982/Fin., Dated 07/05/1982]
†[ G O(P) No. 954/1986/Fin., Dated 27/12/1986]
#  [G O(P) No. 174/1977/Fin., Dated 04/06/1977]
! [G O(P) No. 304/1971/Fin., Dated 01/06/1971]APPENDIX VII ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
337                This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st
April 1970.
              Government Decision
                The Rules in this section will apply to part-time teachers also with effect from
7th August 1971.
15.         *The teachers under the Department of Technical Education may be granted
special causal leave upto a maximum  of 10 days either prefixed or suffixed to
the vacation, for attending short-time refresher courses/seminars, in case the
period of the training falls outside the vacation period.  For periods in excessof 10 days,  regular leave will be granted.  For this purpose the teachers may,
as a special case, be permitted to  combine special casual leave with regular
leave.
         The Principals of the Engineering Colleges, Polytechnics, Women’s
Polytechnics and the Institute of Printing Technology, Shornur are
authorised to sanction special casual leave under this rule.
              This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 18
th
September 1973.
16.         † Disabled State Government employees, shall be eligible for special casual
leave for a maximum period of 15 days at a time (including the time spent in
transit both ways)  to attend Artificial Limb Centre and stay in hospital for
replacement/treatment of their artificial limbs. Special casual leave under thisrule may be granted on more than one occasion in a calendar year, if needed.
16A.     
 #  All physically handicapped employees eligible to claim conveyance
allowance shall be eligible for special casual leave for a maximum period
*[G O(P) No. 199/1974/Fin., Dated 13/09/1974]
†[G O(P) No. 174/1977/Fin., Dated  04/06/1977]
# [G O(P) No. 800/1985/Fin., Dated 10/12/1985]KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II APPENDIX VII ]
338of 15 days in a calendar year for treatment of illness connected with the
physical handicap of the employee concerned in hospital or at residenceon production of medical certificate to that effect from the authorisedMedical Officers attending on them.
17.         *Teaching staff of Government Colleges accompanying students’ teams for
University Youth Festivals organised by the University Union and teaching
staff of schools who accompany the students’ teams for Youth Festivals,
sports meets, coaching camps conducted at State level shall be grantedspecial casual leave for the days of the events and the minimum period
required for to and fro journeys subject to the condition that the total period
of suchspecial casual leave shall not exceed 15 days in a calendar year.
18.       
†The staff guides, namely teachers in schools and junior lecturers and
lecturers in colleges engaged in the Forest Club activities will be granted
two days special casual leave in a calendar year for attending to seminars,
etc. relating to those activities.
                Effective from 5th June 1985.
19.      # Employees who undergo **(Omitted) heart surgery or organ/kidney
transplantation shall be granted special casual leave not exceeding 45 days ina calendar year, on production of certificate to that effect from an authorised
Medical Officer to cover the actual period required for **(Omitted) heart
surgery or organ/kidney transplantation followed by post  transplantationrecovery. The leave may be allowed to be combined  with the ordinary leave
as defined in rule 77 (i) part I of these Rules or with ordinary casual leave. The
period of leave under this rule shall be exclusive of public holidays that mayintervene and the leave may be availed of on more than one occasion in a
calendar year, if needed.
*[G O(P) No. 218/1978/Fin., Dated  27/02/1978]
†[G O(P) No. 51/1989/Fin., Dated 30/01/1989]
# [Insertion G O(P) No. 508/2012/Fin., Dated 22/09/2012(with effect from 26/02/2011)]APPENDIX VII ]
**[Deleted G O(P) No. 581/2014/Fin., Dated 29/12/2014(with effect from 09/09/2013)]KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
339  Explanation:- For the purpose of this rule, ‘authorised medical officer’ means,-
         (i)  The Medical Officers of Government not below the rank of an
Assistant Surgeon; and
            (ii)   Private Medical Pratitioners of modern medicine registered in Part
A of the Register of Modern Medicines.
19.A.      †Employees who undergo chemotherapy or radiation shall be granted special
casual leave not exceeding six months in a calendar year, subject to the
conditions, specified in rule 19.
20.          * Every employee having a physically or mentally challenged child shall
be granted special casual leave for a maximum period of 15 days in a
calendar year on production of a certificate from a medical officer attendingthe child, stating that the child is physically, or mentally, challenged, on
each occasion of the leave. Special casual leave under this rule shall be
granted on more than one occasion subject to a maximum period of 15
days in a calendar year, if found necessary. The leave may be combined
with ordinary leave or casual leave and the period of leave shall beexclusive of public holidays that may intervene. If both the parents are
Government employees, a declaration countersigned by the competent
authority to the effect that the spouse has not availed the leave in that
calendar year shall also be produced.
21.            ** An employee shall be granted special casual leave for the day of voluntary
blood donation, on production of a certificate of blood donation from theMedical Officer of the institution where blood is donated, provided that thenumber of days of such Special Casual Leave that can be availed by anemployee shall not exceed 2 days with effect from 4
th May, 1989 to 19th
*[Insertion G O(P) No. 405/2013/Fin., Dated 27/08/2013 (with effect from 26/02/2011)]KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
†[Insertion G O(P) No. 581/2014/Fin., Dated 29/12/2014 (with effect from 09/09/2013)]
**[Insertion G O(P) No. 580/2014/Fin., Dated 29/12/2014]APPENDIX VII ]
340              Subject to the following conditions, compensation leave at the rate of one
day for each public holiday may be granted to a Government servant whoattends office on public (authorised) holidays under the orders of the headof office in order to attend to urgent work arising from the absence of anotherGovernment servant or from circumstances beyond the control of theGovernment Servant:
                (i)    Such leave should be taken by a Government servant only with the prior
permission of the authority competent to grant him casual leave.
                (ii)   The maximum period of such leave that can be taken by a Government
servant in a calendar year will be **fifteen days.
                         **Effective from 1
st June 1989.
                (iii)     No Government servant will be permitted to take such leave after the expiry of
three months from the public holiday (s) on which he attended office and in lieu
of which the leave is granted.
                   (iv)    Such leave will not be accumulated for more than 10 days  but such leave
may be combined with casual leave or other authorised holidays providedthat the total period of absence from duty shall # not exceed fifteen days.
                        †Effective from 7
th May 1973.
**[G O(P) No. 840/1992/Fin., Dated  04/11/1992]
# [Substitution G O(P) No.61/2007/Fin.,  Dated 17/02/2007]
†[G O(P) No. 548/1977/Fin., Dated  23/12/1977]APPENDIX VII ]
SECTION  III
 COMPENSATION  LEA VENovember, 2012 and 4 days with effect from 20th November, 2012 during a
calendar year.KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
341# [G O(P) No. 395/1974/Fin., Dated  29/11/1974]                (v)    Such leave may not be combined with regular leave such as earned
leave, half pay leave, etc.
              (vi)    A Government servant touring on public (authorised) holiday(s) in
connection with performance of his duties is not eligible for suchleave in lieu of the holiday(s) on which he was on tour.
              (vii)   Such leave shall not be admissible to heads of offices.
                         Effective from 3
rd July 1970.
  # Note .- The benefit of compensatory off for turn duty on Sundays and other
closed holidays will be allowed to the security staff, only withoutdetriment to the normal security duties.KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II APPENDIX VII ]
342APPENDIX  VIII
RULES  FOR  THE  GRANT  OF  LEA VE  TO  OFFICERS
APPOINTED  FOR  LIMITED  PERIODS
(Referred to in Appendix I and Note I below Rule 63 of Part I)
1.         Where the appointment is for one year or less, earned leave on full pay
calculated at 1/11th of the period spent on duty may be granted subject to
a maximum of 15 days on production of medical certificate.  If earnedleave has been exhausted, leave on medical certificate, on *half pay upto
15 days may be granted subject to the condition that the total period of
the two kinds of leave does not exceed one month in the officer’s term ofservice.
            If the officer serves in a vacation department, earned leave will not be
admissible; but he may be granted, if absolutely necessary leave onmedical certificate on *half pay not exceeding 1/11
th of the time spent on
duty, subject to a  maximum of 15 days during the officer’s term of service.
               *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from
1st April 1973.
2.            Where the appointment is for more than one year but not more than five
years, earned leave will be admissible at 1/11th of the period spent on
duty, subject to the limit of 15 days in a year.  Such leave may be
accumulated upto a maximum period of two months.  Leave on medicalcertificate on † half pay may also be granted in addition to earned leave
subject to a maximum of two months in all during the period of service.  In
addition, leave without allowances may be granted in specialcircumstances, when no other leave is admissible, subject to a total
maximum limit of three months.
                     If the officer serves in a vacation department earned leave will not be admissible.
*[G O(P) No. 491/1975/Fin., Dated  24/10/1975]
†[G O(P) No. 825/1980/Fin., Dated  31/10/1980]APPENDIX VIII ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
343  Note .-  Maternity leave under Rules 100 and 101 will be admissible to female
officers appointed on contract basis continuing in service beyond one
year provided they would continue in service but for proceeding on
such leave.
  †This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from
26th August 1971.
3.            Where the appointment is for a longer period than five years, but not for
an indefinite period, or an original appointment for five years or less is
extended so as to make the total period of appointment longer than five
years but not for an indefinite period, leave admissible to a permanentofficer under the ordinary rules, may be allowed subject to the condition
that leave on medical certificate on *half pay will be limited to six months
in all.  In the case of extension of the original term of appointment to morethan five years, the officer will be credited with the earned leave that
would have been admissible had the appointment been initially one of
more than 5 years diminished by the earned leave already taken andleave on medical certificate on *half pay, if any, already taken, will count
against the six months limit prescribed.
4.            In the case of an officer falling under Rules 2 and 3 above, earned leave due
may be granted after the expiry of the period of appointment, only if the leave
has been applied for during the period of appointment and refused owing to
the exigencies of the public service.  An officer whose services are dispensedwith on grounds of ill-health may be permitted to take all the earned leave due
to him before his service is terminated.
5.             The terms “earned leave” and “leave on medical certificate on half pay” used
in these rules have the same meanings as they have in the other rules of
the Kerala Service Rules and the leave salary during leave taken under
†[G O(P) No. 825/1980/Fin., Dated  31/10/1980]
*[G O(P) No. 491/1975/Fin., Dated  24/10/1975]APPENDIX VIII ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
344          these rules shall be regulated under Rules 92 and 93 of Part I, Kerala
Service Rules *.
               *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from
1st April 1973.
6.          An officer initially engaged for a limited period becomes subject to the
ordinary leave rules in their entirety, on his being taken into permanentemployment.  In such a case, the officer will be credited with all the leave
that would have been admissible, had his appointment been one for an
indefinite period from the start diminished by the leave already taken.Leave on medical certificate, if any, already taken will count against the
maximum limit prescribed.
7.         In the case of an officer who has been appointed for a limited period to a
temporary post or to a permanent post in an officiating capacity,  leave will be
granted only on the further condition that his leave vacancy is not filled up
and that the leave or any portion thereof will not go beyond the sanctionedperiod of his service.
   Note .- The above rules will not apply to officers who were appointed before
the coming into effect of these rules or to officers in whose case the
terms of their appointment specifically provide for the grant of leaveotherwise than in accordance with these rules.
            
 Government Decision No. 1
              † Rules in Appendix VIII will apply to provisional recruits in the matter of
leave.
              Government Decision No. 2
          **The leave earned by provisional recruits during provisional service
diminished by the leave, if any, already taken will be carried forward on
regularisation of their provisional appointment without any interruption.
*[G O(P) No. 491/1975/Fin., Dated  24/10/1975]
† [G O(P) No. 103/1961/Fin., Dated  04/03/1961]
**[G O(P) No. 388/1970/Fin.,  Dated 03/06/1970]APPENDIX VIII ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
345               **The provisional recruits will be eligible for the leave admissible to regular
employees only from the date of regularisation of appointment.
              Government Decision No. 3
              †An officer on contract appointment will be credited with the leave earned
by him in his previous contract appointment (s) diminished by the leave, ifany, already taken even if the appointments are not in the same post provided
there is no break between the appointments.
              Government Decision No. 4
            
   # Officers appointed on a fixed monthly honorarium against regular sanctioned
post will be governed by the leave rules in this Appendix.  The benefit of surrender
of earned leave will be allowed to them as in the case of provisional employees.
*8.  (i)        An officer appointed under rule 9(a) (i) of the General Rules of Part II of the Kerala
State and Subordinate Services Rules, 1958 through Employment Exchange for
a period of 180 days shall be eligible for casual leave at the rate of one day for amonth subject to a maximum of six days. Casual leave may be allowed to combine
with Sundays and other authorised holidays provided that the resulting period
of absence from duty shall not exceed four days at a strech.
               (ii)   Contract employees referred to in rule 8, and re-employed pensioners
referred to in rule 63 of Part I of these rules may be granted casual leave
at the rate of one day for a month subject to a maximum of twelve daysin a year. The leave may be allowed to combine with Sundays and other
authorised holidays provided that the resulting period of absence from
duty shall not exceed seven days at a stretch.
                 (iii)    All other conditions in rules relating to casual leave under Appendix VII,
Part I of these rules shall mutatis mutandis apply”.
**[G O(P) No. 322/1993/Fin., Dated 12/05/1993]
†[G O(P) No. 499/1971/Fin., Dated 23/08/1971]
# [G O(P) No. 55/1974/Fin., Dated  07/03/1974]APPENDIX VIII ]
*[G O(P) No. 333/2014/Fin., Dated 13/08/2014. (with effect from 01/12/2010)]KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
346APPENDIX   IX
LIST  OF  HILLY  TRACTS
 (Referred to in Note 1 to Rule 44 of Part II)
           A. Class I Tracts
1.         # Of the area detailed below the tracts falling within the taluks of Devicolam,
Udumbanchola, Peermade, Pathanamthitta, Pathanapuram , Nedumangad and
Neyyattinkara will form Class I tracts :-
         The portion lying to the east of a due north and south line from the
northeastern most boundary of the Kunnathunad Taluk  upto Thattakkadand thence passing eastwards along southern bank of the Periyar river
upto the junction of its northern tributary, the Muthirapuzhai or Munnar
river thence southwards along the western bank of the Periyar river, andits tributary, the Cheruthoniyar and the Endayar upto Mundakkayam
bridge on the Kottayam – Kumili road, thence southwards straight on
the junction of the Aruthayar and the Pamabayar and thence to thejunction of the Palathada Aur and Kokkad Aur, thence due south to the
Achenkoil river crossing the Kallar and thence to Ramakal along the
southern bank of the Achenkoil river.
               *The portion lying to the south of a line starting from Channar ghat peak and
passing along the northern bank of the Shendurni river upto the junction of
the Quilon-Shencottah road and Trvandrum-Schencottah road, thence passing
southward along the eastern side of the Trivandrum-Shencottah road uptoPalode, thence along the eastern side of the road from Palode, to Arianad via
Vidura till it meets the Nedumangad- Shorlacode road and thence passing
southwards along the Nedumangadu-Shorlacode road till it meets the StateBoundary.
# [G O(P) No. 59/1975/Fin., Dated 13/02/1975]               *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from
22nd February 1973
*[G O(P) No. 366/1975/Fin., Dated  11/08/1975]APPENDIX IX ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
3472               Chalakudy Division .-  Starting from 19th mile in Tramline at Cherumkayam the
line proceeds northwards to meet the division boundary and thence follows
the division boundary upto the State boundary and thence along the
Sekkalamudi, thence to Parambikulam, thence along the Parambikulam riverupto Muduvarachal and thence westwards passing Kavali Anapandam and
meet the starting station at Cherumkayam.
              Trichur Division (Nelliampathy Range).-
             North.- The boundary starts from the inter-district boundary of Trichur and
Palghat at Vellamttimalai and proceeds more or less northeast passing the
northern side of Padagirimala and Palayampara Estate and reaches the districtboundary at nearly one mile south of Govindamalai Estate; thence along the
above inter-district boundary towards northeast for about one mile and reaches
nearly half a mile northwest of Oottukuzhi Estate.
            East.-  Thence the boundary proceeds along the inter-district boundary of
Palaghat and Trichur and reaches the junction point of Thekkadi and Vetti
rivers.
                South .-Thence more or less east along the inter-forest division boundary of
Chalakudy and Trichur to the inter-district boundary of Trichur and Palghat
at nearly one mile north of Anjanapara.
             West.-  Thence the boundary proceeds along the inter-district boundary of
Palghat and Trichur and reaches the starting point.
              Palappilly Range.-
           East.- The boundary starts from Ponmudi at which the inter-range boundary
between Palappilly and Paravattany  meets the inter-district boundary of Trichur
and Palaghat, and proceeds along the above inter-district boundary and reaches
a point nearly one mile south of Kurumalamudi.APPENDIX IX ] KERALA S ERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
348           South.- Thence the boundary proceeds more or less southwest along the
inter-forest division boundary between Trichur and Chalakudy for about 5½
miles to reach nearly two miles south of Kumali.
                  West.- Thence the boundary proceeds nearly west to reach the Chiminipuzha
at nearly one mile west of Kallichitra, thence along the northern side of
Chiminipuzha for about ¾ mile downstream; thence along the tributary ofChiminipuzha to reach the inter-taluk boundary between Mukundapuram and
Trichur at nearly 1 ¾ miles west of Ponmudi.
             North.-   Thence along the above inter-taluk boundary till it reaches Ponmudi,
the starting point.
3.            Attappadi Valley and the Chenat Nair, * and Silent Valley Reserved Forest.
4.             Sungam Range of Nemmara Forest Division.
5.            *[Omitted]
               *Effective from 9
th March 1981.
6.         Idukki District.- The area comprising the whole of Idukki Village and the
portions of Velliamatom and Arakulam Villages in Thodupuzha Taluk having
the boundaries specified below :
               North. - Boundaries of Kotahmangalam and Devicolam Taluks.
               East. - Boundaries of Udumbanchola Taluk.
               South.- Boundaries of Peerumedu Taluk.
         West. - The line across Arakulam Village, starting from the tri-junction of
Passupara Village in Peerumedu Taluk and Arakulam and Idukki Village of
*[G O(P) No. 159/1981/Fin., Dated  09/03/1981]APPENDIX IX ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
349Thodupuzha Taluk and ending at first Zig point on Thodupuzha-Idukki Road
and the line thence across Velliamattom village to the tri-junction of Idukki,Velliamattom and Udumbannoor Village of Thodupuzha Taluk from wherethe western boundary of Idukki Village goes north-wards to meet the Talukboundary of Kothamangalam.
             The item 6 shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 9
th
December 1970.
               B. Class II  Tracts
             1.  The portions of the area other than those falling within the taluks of
Devicolam, Peermade, Udumbanchola and Pathanmathitta detailed atA1 above, will form Class II tracts.
            2.  Chalakudy Division.- Starting from Cherumkayam the boundary
proceeds upto Kothamuzhi, thence along the Kannamkuzhi thoduupto Chalakudi river, thence along the river the boundary proceedsup to Echipara, thence to Vellikulangara passing Konnakuzhi,Peeliarmuzhi, Kormala and Veeranchira, thence the boundaryproceeds nearly northwards to cross the Vaikathu stream and meetthe division boundary and along the said boundary of Class I tractsand closes on the starting station.
              Nelliampathy Range.-              * West .- The boundary starts from the inter-district boundary of Palghat and
Trichur at Vellattimalai and proceeds northwest to reach the village boundaryof Thiruvazhiyad and Kairady Village tri-junction.
         North.- Thence along the boundary of Thiruvazhiyad and Nemmara
touching the main road, thence the boundary proceeds along the road toShernally Rubber Estates to the 11
th  mile.
*[G O(P) No. 159/1981/Fin., Dated  09/03/1981]APPENDIX IX ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
350          * East.- Thence along the above road for about 4 Kilometres to reach the
northern boundary of Class I area at Pulayampara described in theNelliampathy Range under the heading “A. Class I Tracts”.
               South.- Thence the boundary proceeds along the northern boundary of Class I
area in Nelliampathy Range and reaches the starting point.
              Palappilly Range.-
          North.- The boundary proceeds from the inter-range boundary between
Palappilly and Paravattany at nearly half a mile west of Mangattukumban
and proceeds east to reach where the northern boundary of Class I area
described in ‘A’ above starts.
                East.-  Thence along the western boundary of Class I area in Palappilly Range
described in ‘A’ above to reach the inter-forest division boundary of Trichur and
Chalakudy.
         South.- Thence along the above inter-division boundary to reach
Muplypuzha near fourteenth mile of Cochin State Forest Tramway.
               West.-  Thence along Muplypuzha downstream for about 5 miles and along
Chiminipuzha for about 3½ miles upstream to reach neraly 1½ miles east ofAnaipadam, and thence to meet the inter-range boundary at the starting
point.
              Paravattany Range .-
               North.-  The boundary starts from the inter-taluk boundary of Talappilly and
Trichur at 2 ¼ miles east south-east to Melaka and proceeds along the above
inter-taluk boundary to reach the inter-district boundary of Palghat andTrichur.
*[G O(P) No. 605/1981/Fin., Dated 17/09/1981]APPENDIX IX ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
351          East.- Thence along the above inter-district boundary the boundary
proceeds to Ponmudi where the inter-taluk boundary between
Mukundapuram and Trichur meets the inter-district boundary.
              South.- Thence the boundary proceeds along the northern boundary of Class I
and Class  II areas described above in Palappily Range.
            West.-  Thence the boundary proceeds northwest to reach ¾ mile north to
Vengapara, thence to northwest to reach Peechi Dam, thence proceeds along
the Peechi Right Bank Canal to reach the crossing point at Trichur-Vaniampara
road and thence proceeds northwest to meet the inter-taluk boundary at thestarting point.
             *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect
from 1
st day of September 1975.
              Machad Range.-
           West.- The boundary starts from the crossing point of Trichur-Ambalappadu
road at the inter-range boundary of Machad Range and Paravattany Range and
proceeds along the sixth mile. Thence more or less northeast to reachWadakkancherry-Vazhani road near Vazhani.
           North.- Thence along the above road and succeeding cart-tract for about
one mile; thence crossing Vazhani lake and along the thodu starting fromnearby place of Munipara and falls in Vazhani lake; reaches the inter-range
boundary at nearly half a mile west of Munipara.
             East.- Thence the boundary proceeds southwest for about 1¾ miles along
the inter-range boundary of Machad Range and Paravattany Range.
                South.- Thence the boundary proceeds along the above inter-range boundary
and reaches the starting point.
*[G O(P) No. 143/1980/Fin., Dated 19/02/1980]3.       The Wayanad Taluk and the Vaithiri Ghat section.APPENDIX IX ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
352APPENDIX   XII
RULES  FOR  THE  GRANT  OF  LEA VE  TO  RADIATION
WORKERS  IN  THE  STATE  MEDICAL  SERVICE
(Referred to in Rule 110 A of Part I)
               Rules for the grant of leave to Radiation Workers in the State Medical Service.
                   1.   For the purpose of these Rules:
 (i)   “Radiation worker” means a worker liable to exposure to
ionising radiation in the course of his official work which
shall include a person working inside the X-ray and RadiumDepartments like Radiologist, Radiographer, Technician
and Nursing staff of Radiology Department but does not
include stretcher bearers, attenders, etc., of the RadiologyDepartment who are not exposed to radiation while a patient
is being X-rayed or treated.
 (ii)    “A year” means a year of duty.
                   2.   *Every radiation worker shall be granted thirty days special casual
leave in one spell, every year to recoup his health even when his
health is apparently good.
                      This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect
from 1
st April 1995.
                   3.   These Rules shall apply to all radiation workers (permanent or temporary
employees) in the State Medical Service but not to purely provisional
hands.
                        The above Rule shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from
29th March 1965.
*[G O(P) No. 992/1997/Fin., Dated 05/11/1997]APPENDIX XII ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
353APPENDIX  XII A
RULES  FOR  THE  GRANT  OF  LEA VE  WITHOUT  ALLOWANCES  FOR
TAKING  UP  EMPLOYMENT  ABROAD  OR  WITHIN  INDIA
(Referred to in Exception 2 to Rule 88 and Rule 110-B of Part I)
                * The following  rules shall regulate the grant of leave without allowances to
officers for taking up employment abroad or within India.  These rules shall
not apply in cases of employment in the service of any public sector
undertaking, aided schools and private colleges †or self financing colleges
within the state or any body incorporated or not, which is wholly or
substantially owned, controlled or aided by any State Government or the
Government of India.
1.          Government will be very selective in granting leave without allowances to
employees belonging to professional categories like highly qualified doctors,
engineers, scientists etc.,  for taking up employment abroad or within India.
In scarce categories like Veterinary Surgeons, Livestock Assistants and anyother category where there is shortage of personnel, officers will not be
allowed to take up such employment unless they resign their jobs under
Government before hand.
2.        No officer going for employment under these rules will be treated as on
deputation.  An officer taking up employment abroad or within India on his
own accord will have to go on leave without allowances to avail himself ofthe facility.
3.        No other kind of leave will be sanctioned in combination with or in
continuation of the leave under these rules,  **except leave underAppendix XII C.
†[Insertion G O(P) No. 245/2012/Fin., Dated 27/04/2012. (with effect from 07/06/2010)]
**[G O(P) No. 1002/1997/Fin., Dated  06/11/1997]APPENDIX XII A ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
3544.        *Permanent officers and non-permanent officers in the regular service of
Government who have completed probation in the grade in which they are
working, including entry grade, may be granted leave without allowancesunder these rules.  In such cases, for and during the currency of, the periodof leave, the officers shall lose all service benefits such as the earning ofleave including half pay leave, pension, gratuity, increment, etc., and alsopromotion chances as may arise with reference to their seniority in the postsfrom which they proceeded on leave. They shall also lose seniority in thehigher grade/grades with reference to their juniors who might get promotedto such grade/grades before they rejoin duty.
  
† Note .-  Omitted
4A            # Permanent and non-permanent officers in the regular service of Government
who have completed probation in their entry grade, buy have not completedprobation in the grade in which they are working may be granted  leavewithout allowances subject to the condition that they will lose service benefitssuch as earning of leave including half pay leave, pension, gratuity, incrementetc., and also promotion chances that may arise with reference to their seniority
in that grade for and during the currency of the leave period and will have torejoin as the junior most  in that grade and start afresh. They shall also loseseniority in the higher grade/ grades with respect to their juniors who mightget promoted to such grade/ grades before they rejoin duty. However, theirprior service including that in the grade will count for accrual of Half PayLeave, Earned Leave; time bound grade promotion, increment and pension.
**5     Non-permanent officers in the regular service who have not completed
probation in the entry cadre shall be granted Leave Without Allowances
subject to the condition that such officers will have to start their probation
[* Substitution, # Insertion G O(P) No.94/2010/Fin., Dated 01/03/2010
    (with effect from 01/03/2010) ]
† Omitted, ** Insertion [G O(P) No. 359/2015/Fin., Dated 13/08/2015
    (with effect from 23/08/2012)]APPENDIX XII A ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
355@6.         The maximum period of leave that may be sanctioned to an officer during his
entire service shall be limited to twenty years **and such leave shall not
extend beyond twelve months before the date of superannuation. If the
officer who has availed himself of the leave without allowances for a totalperiod of 20 years, whether continuously or in broken periods does notreturn to duty immediately on the expiry of the leave, his service shall be
terminated after following the procedure in Kerala Civil Services
(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1960. This condition shall beincorporated in every order sanctioning such leave.
               
@This shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 5th February, 1996.
               **This shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 2nd May 2002.
7.           Those who are under bonded obligation to serve Government for a prescribed
period will not be granted leave under these rules till the period covered by the
bond is over, unless they settle the bonded obligations before the grant of leave.The amount remitted on that account will not be refunded under any
circumstances.  Similarly, officers against whom disciplinary action or vigilance
enquiry is pending will not be eligible for leave under these rules.
@ [Substitution  G O(P) No. 637/2002/Fin., Dated 19/10/2002]
**[G O(P) No. 215/2005/Fin., Dated  11/05/2005]*[Deleted G O(P) No. 636/2010/Fin., Dated 25/11/10 (with effect from 09/04/2008)]APPENDIX XII A ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
afresh and complete their probation on return from Leave Without
Allowances. Such officers will forfeit the service benefits that have accruedto them prior to their proceeding on Leave Without Allowances and they
will be deemed as new entrants to Government service on return from Leave
Without Allowances. Their right to rejoin Government service in the sameentry cadre is protected, as if they were new entrants. On further verification
by the Kerala Public Service Commission/ the Police Department, if it is
found that the officer is ineligible for appointment, the appointment shall betreated as null and void and the Leave Without Allowances shall be treated
as cancelled from the date of sanction of leave.
3568.           Those who had availed themselves of any loan such as house  building
advance, conveyance advance etc., shall either clear the dues or execute
a bond as required under G.O.(P) 1028/79/Fin.,dated 23rd November  1979
in the form appended thereto, before the grant of leave. *Those who are
subscribers of Group Insurance Scheme shall be permitted to remit thearrear subscription for the defaulted period, with quarterly compound
interest at the rate specified by Government for the savings fund, in not
more than three instalments, provided they have not attained the age of50 years, on rejoining duty, after obtaining Government sanction.  Such
members shall lose their entitlement under the insurance fund in the
event of death during the period of leave under this rule.  Those whohave attained the age of 50 years on the date of rejoining duty on expiry
of Leave Without Allowances shall cease to be a subscriber of the scheme
and shall be entitled for accrued balance under savings fund only at thetime of  retirement.
9.          Those officers who absent themselves unauthorisedly without getting the
leave sanctioned under these rules shall be proceeded against and theirservice terminated after following the procedure laid down in the Kerala Civil
Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules 1960.  Requests for re-
entertainment in Government Service in such cases as well as in casescovered by Rule 6 above,  will be summarily rejected.
10.          These  rules shall apply to all cases of grant of leave without allowances on
or after the  16
th December, 1983 whether in extension of the leave already
granted or otherwise and such leave granted before that date shall be
reckoned for applying the 20** years limit under Rule 6 above.
              **They shall be  deemed to have come into force on 5th February 1996.
*[Substitution G O(P) No. 217/2012/Fin., Dated 11/04/2012 (with effect from 02/08/2007)]
**[G O(P) No. 637/2002/Fin., Dated 19/10/2002]APPENDIX XII A ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
35711.        No relaxation of any of the above rules will be allowed.
               # This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from
16th December 1983.
 † Note .- Notwithstanding anything contained in these Rules those who have
proceeded on leave for taking up employment abroad *or within thecountry before the commencement of these Rules, after obtaining
permission of Government will continue to be governed by the
conditions laid down in G.O.(P) 274/70/Fin., dated 29-4-1970 for theleave granted to them even if it extends beyond 16-12-1983.
  
† Effective  from 16th December 1983.
# [G O(P) No. 953/1986/Fin., Dated  27/12/1986]
*[G O(P) No. 150/1996/Fin., Dated  30/01/1996]
†[G O(P) No. 1078/1992/Fin., Dated 16/12/1992]APPENDIX XII A ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
358APPENDIX  XII B
RULES  FOR  THE  GRANT  OF   LEA VE  WITHOUT  ALLOWANCES  FOR
THOSE  INELIGIBLE  FOR  LEA VE  FOR  STUDY  PURPOSE
UNDER  RULE  88  OR  RULE  91,  PART  I,
KERALA  SERVICE  RULES
(Referred to in Exception No. 2 to Rule 88 and in Rule 110 – C
under Section XI-C of Chapter IX, Part I.)
           * The following Rules shall regulate the grant of leave for study purpose in the
case of Officers who are not eligible for leave for more than three months under
Rule 88 due to the condition of 3 years of continuous service or under Rule 91
due to the condition in Note 2 thereunder.  In such cases Leave Without
Allowances will be granted for the purpose of study to cover the entire period ofthe course concerned subject to the following conditions :-
                  (i)    In the case of officers who have completed probation in the entry grade,
during the currency of the period of leave, they shall  lose all servicebenefits such as earning of all kinds of Leave, Pension, Gratuity, Increment
etc., and also promotion benefits which may arise with reference to their
seniority in the posts from which they proceeded on leave. They shall alsolose seniority in the higher grade/grades with reference to their juniors
who might get promoted to  such grade/grades before they rejoin duty.
†Officers who have completed probation in their entry grade, but have not
completed probation in the grade to which they have been promoted
subsequently may be granted leave without allowances subject to the
condition that they will lose service benefits such as earning of leaveincluding Half  Pay Leave, Pension, Gratuity, Increment and also promotion
chances that may arise with respect to their seniority in that grade for and
during the currency of the leave period and will have to join as junior mostin that grade and start afresh. They shall also lose seniority in the higher
† [Inserted G O(P) No. 94/2010/Fin., Dated 01/03/2010 (with effect from 01/03/2010)]*[G O(P) No. 654/1995/Fin., Dated 10/10/1995]APPENDIX XII B ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
359grade/grades with respect to their juniors who might get promoted to
such grade/ grades before they rejoin duty. However, their prior service
including that in the grade will count for accrual of Half Pay Leave,
Earned Leave, time bound grade promotion, increment and pension.
              (ii)   In the case of  those who have not completed probation in the entry
grade, they shall. besides losing all the service benefits during the
currency of the period of leave, forfeit the service benefits that had
accrued to them prior to their proceeding on leave. They shall be deemed
as new entrants to Government Service on return from leave.  Theyshall have to start afresh and complete their probation on return from
leave. Only their right to rejoin Government Service in the same entry
grade is protected as if they were new entrants;
               (iii)   Those who are under bonded obligation to serve Government for a
prescribed period will not be granted leave under these rules till the
period covered by the bond is over, unless they settle the bondedobligation before the grant of leave. The amount remitted on that
account will not be refunded under any circumstances. Officers
against whom disciplinary action or vigilance enquiry is pendingwill not be eligible for leave under these Rules;
              (iv)    The maximum period of leave that can be granted will be five years
during the entire period of service;
                 (v)    The leave will not be allowed to be combined with any other kind of leave
or vacation;
               (vi)    In the case of officers who do not rejoin duty on the expiry of leave, they
shall be removed from service after following the procedure laid down in
the Kerala Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal)  Rules, 1960.
                        *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect
from 18
th September 1984.
*[G O(P) No. 654/1995/Fin., Dated 10/10/1995]APPENDIX XII B ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
360APPENDIX XII  C
RULES  FOR  THE  GRANT  OF  LEA VE  WITHOUT  ALLOWANCES
FOR  JOINING  SPOUSE
(Referred to in Exception 2 to Rule 88 and in Rule 110-D, Part I)
               * The  following rules shall regulate the grant of leave without allowances for
the purpose of joining spouse.
                   1.   Only leave without allowances shall be granted for the purpose.
   Note .- Officers, who seek leave for short periods, not exceeding three months
for the purpose of joining spouse, may be granted ordinary leavesubject to eligibility.  However, when officers who avail of such leaveupto three months, seek extension in continuation of the leave for thesame purpose, the ordinary leave already granted shall beretrospectively commuted into leave without allowances under theserules.
                 2.   Officers shall not accept any employment during the currency of the
period of leave, without prior sanction of the Government.
                      3.    No other kind of leave except leave under Appendix XIIA shall be granted
in combination with or in continuation of the leave under  these rules.
                    4.   @ Permanent officers and non-permanent officers in the regular service
of Government who have completed  probation in the grade in whichthey are working, including entry cadre, may be granted leave withoutallowances under these rules. In such cases, for, and during the currencyof the period of leave, the officers shall  lose all service  benefits includingearning of leave, increment, gratuity, pension etc., and also promotionchances as may arise with reference to their seniority in the posts from
@ [Substitution G O(P) No. 94/2010/Fin., Dated 01/03/2010 (with effect from 01/03/2010)]APPENDIX XII C ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  & II
361which they proceed on leave.  They shall also lose seniority in the
higher grade (s) with reference to their juniors who might get promotedto such grade (s) before they rejoin duty.
               *Note .- Omitted
             4A     **Permanent and non-permanent officers in the regular service of
Government who have completed probation in their entry grade,but have not completed probation in the grade in which they areworking may be granted  leave without allowances subject to thecondition that they will lose service benefits such as earning ofleave including Half Pay Leave, pension, gratuity, increment etc.,and also promotion chances that may arise with reference to theirseniority in that grade for and during the currency of the leaveperiod and will have to rejoin as the junior most in that grade andstart afresh.  They shall also lose seniority in the higher grade/
grades with respect to their juniors who might get promoted to
such grade/grades before they rejoin duty.  However, their priorservice including that in the grade will count for accrual of Half PayLeave, Earned Leave; time bound grade promotion, increment andpension.
            † 5.     Non-permanent officers in the regular service who have not completed
probation in the entry cadre shall be granted Leave Without Allowancessubject to the condition that such officers will have to start theirprobation afresh and complete their probation on return from LeaveWithout Allowances. Such officers will forfeit the service benefits thathave accrued to them prior to their proceeding on Leave WithoutAllowances and they shall be deemed as new entrants to Governmentservice on return from Leave Without Allowances. Their right to rejoin
* Omitted, † Insertion [G O(P) No. 359/2015/Fin., Dated  13/08/2015
   (with effect from 23/08/2012)]
†[Inserted G O(P) No. 94/2010/Fin., Dated  01/03/2010 (with effect from 01.03.2010)]APPENDIX XII C ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
362                * 6.     The maximum period of leave that may be sanctioned to officers under
these rules, including the leave sanctioned under Appendix XIIA, if
any, during their entire service shall be limited to twenty years **andsuch leave shall not extend beyond twelve months before their date ofsuperannuation.  If the officers who have availed of the Leave WithoutAllowances for a total period of twenty  years, whether continuouslyor in broken periods, do not return to duty immediately on the expiry ofthe leave, their service shall be terminated after following the procedurelaid down in Kerala Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal)Rules, 1960.
                         *This shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 9
th May, 1997
                         **This shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 2nd May, 2002.
                  7.     Those who are under bonded obligation to serve the Government for a
prescribed period, shall not be granted leave under these rules till the
period covered by the bond is over or till the bonded obligation issettled.
                  8.    Those who have any outstanding liability to the Government, such as
House Building Advance, Conveyance Advance etc., shall not begranted leave under these rules unless they clear the outstandingliability in toto or execute a bond as prescribed by the Government.
*[Substitution G O(P) No. 636/2002/Fin., Dated 19/10/2002]
**[G O(P) No.215/2005/Fin.,  Dated 11/05/2005]APPENDIX XII C ]
Government service in the same entry cadre is protected as if they
were new entrants. On further verification by the Kerala PublicService Commission/ the Police Department, if it is found that theofficer is ineligible for appointment, the appointment shall be treatedas null and void and the Leave Without Allowances shall be treatedas cancelled from the date of sanction of leave.KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
363†Those who are subscribers of Group Insurance Scheme shall be
permitted to remit the arrear subscription for the defaulted period, withquarterly compound interest at the rate specified by Government for
the savings fund, in not more than three instalments, provided they
have not attained the age of 50 years, on rejoining duty, after obtainingGovernment sanction.  Such members shall lose their entitlement underthe insurance fund in the event of death during the period of leaveunder this rule.  Those who have attained the age of 50 years on thedate of joining duty on expiry of Leave Without Allowances shall ceaseto be a subscriber of the scheme and shall be entitled for the accruedbalance under savings fund only at the time of retirement.
                  9.      Officers against whom disciplinary action or vigilance enquiry is pending
shall not be eligible for leave under these rules.
                10.    Those officers who absent themselves unauthorisedly without getting
the leave sanctioned under these rules shall be proceeded against andtheir service shall be terminated after following the procedure laid downin the Kerala Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules,1960.
                        *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect
from 12
th April 1984.
*[G O(P) No. 1002/1997/Fin., Dated  06/11/1997]APPENDIX XII C ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
†[Substitution G O(P) No.217/2012/Fin., Dated 11/04/2012 (with effect from 02/08/2007)]
364LIST OF FORMS
1.            Service Book (Rule 141 – Part III)
2.               Application for Pension/Gratuity, Death-cum-  retirement Gratuity and Family
Pension (Rules 112, 115, 117 and 90 of Part III)
3.            Form for sending Pension Papers (Rule 115, Part III)
4.            4A to 4D – Forms of Nomination for Death-cum-Retirement Gratuity (Rules
76A, Part III)
5.            Form of Nomination for Non-Contributory Family Pension (Rule 86, Part III)
5A          Details of Family for Contributory Family Pension (Rule 90 Part III)
6.            Application for Family Pension/Contributory Family Pension 1964/Death-
cum-Retirement Gratuity (Rules 118 and 90 of Part III)
6-A.       Form  of Intimation (Rule 118, Part III)
7.            Leave Account (Rule 112-Part I)
8.            Indemnity Bond (Rule 139, Part III)
8-A.       Indemnity Bond to be executed by the guardian of  a minor (Note 2, clause 3,
Rule 118, Part III)
9.            Deleted
10.          Deleted
11.          Formal Application for Pension (Rule 110, Part III)
12.           Bond for officiating or temporary Government servants granted leave (Rule
91—Part I)
13.          Application for leave (Rule 113—Part I)
14.          Overtime Register (Rule 7—Appendix IV A)
15.           †Service and Payroll Administrative Repository for Kerala (SPARK) (Rule 13A-
Part 1)
16.          *Nomination for Payment of Arrears of Pension (Rule 138, Part III)
17.          *Notice of Modification of Nomination (Rule 138, Part III)
18.          *Option for Fixation of Pay
19.          *Register for Casual Leave (Rule 4, Appendix VII).
*[G O(P) No. 465/2012/Fin., Dated  17/08/2012 (with effect from 17/08/2012)]†[G O(P) No. 413/2009/Fin., Dated  25/09/2009 (with effect from 24/04/2007)]KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
365FORM No. 7
LEA VE  ACCOUNT
(Rule 112 of Part I)
Part I
Earned  Leave
Part II
Leave  on  half  pay Duty
From ToPeriod
in daysLeave
earned1/22 or
1/11Leave at
credit
(Columns
3 + 7)Leave taken
From ToPeriod
(days)Balance
on return
from
leave
(Columns
4 - 6)
Remarks
1 2 3 45 6 7 8
DutyLeave
earnedLeave
at
creditLeave taken
DatesFromTo
No. of completed years20 days
for every
completed
year
Days DaysColumns
3+13
Period in daysHalf pay
leaveCommuted
leave
Dates DatesFromTo ToFrom
Period in days
Period in terms of leave
on half pays
Total (Columns 6+9)
  Balance (column 4 -10)
Period of leave  not due taken
Final Balance
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 91 0 1 1 1 2 1 3FORMS
366FORM No. 12
BOND  FOR  OFFICIATING  OR  TEMPORARY  GOVERNMENT
SERV ANTS  GRANTED  LEA VE  UNDER  RULE  91,  PART I,
K.S.R.  FOR  HIGHER  STUDIES
                  KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS  that we Shri……………………..
(H.E. name and address) at present employed at …………………. in the  office
of …….. ………………. (hereinafter called “the Bounden”) and
Shri……………………………. (H.E. name and address) and Shri.…………………….. (H.E. name and address) ……… ………………………..
(hereinafter called “the sureties”) do hereby bind ourselves, and each of us,
our heirs, executors,  administrators and assigns jointly and severally to payto the Governor of Kerala (hereinafter called “the Government”) on demand
the sum of ````` 1,000 (Rupees one thousand only) together with interest at
……….. per cent per annum or if the payment is made in a country other thanIndia, the equivalent of the said amount in the currency of that country
converted at the official rate of exchange between that country and India
and with cost, if any, thereon.
             Signed on this the ……………………….. day of …………………… one
thousand nine hundred and ………………….
                          Signed by Shri. …………………………                ( The Bounden)
               In the presence of witnesses:
                            (1)                            (2)
                                            Signed by Shri ………………………….
                                            Signed by Shri ………………………….                                                     (The Sureties)KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
367               In the presence of witnesses:
                            (1)                            (2)
          WHEREAS  the Government have granted to the Bounden regular leave,
followed by leave without allowances, for a period ………………. months
………….. days with effect from ……………… in order to enable the Bounden
to study at ….. on condition that on the expiry of the leave, the Boundenshall serve the Government in such capacity as the Government may require
in the……………………..… Department of the Government or in any other
Department of the Government  as the Government may require, for a periodof five years and also subject to the terms and conditions hereinafter appearing
and the Bounden and the sureties have agreed to the same;
               Now the condition of the above written obligation is that in the event of the
Bounden failing to serve in such capacity as the Government may direct for
a minimum period of five years if so required by the Government , the Bounden
and the sureties shall forthwith pay to the Government the said sum of
````` 1,000 together with interest at ……. percent per annum and costs and
upon payment of such sums the above written obligation shall be void and
of no effect, otherwise this shall be and remain in full force and effect;
               Provided further that the Bounden and the sureties hereby agree that all
sums found due to Government under or by virtue of this bond shall be
recoverable jointly and severally from the Bounden and the sureties andtheir properties movable and immovable under the provisions of the
Revenue Recovery Act for the time being in force as though such sums
are arrears of land revenue or in such other manner as the Governmentmay deem fit.FORMS
368              The liability of the sureties under this bond is co-extensive with that of the
Bounden and shall not be affected by the Government giving time or anyother indulgence to the Bounden.
              The stamp duty on this bond shall be borne and paid by the Government.                         Signed by Shri ………………                                      (The Bounden)                         In the presence of witnesses:                         (1)                         (2)                         Signed by Shri……………………                         Signed by Shri …………………...                                      (The Sureties)                         In the presence of witnesses:                         (1)                         (2)KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
369*FORM NO. 13
APPLICATION  FOR  LEA VE
(See Rule 113, Part I)
  Note .-  Items 1 to 14 must be filled in by all applicants whether gazetted or
non-gazetted.
1.            Name of applicant                         :
2.            Date of birth                                   :3.            Post held                                         :4.            Department, Office and Section  :5.            Pay and scale of pay                     :6.            Date of entry in  service               :
7.            Date of commencement of continuous service   :
8.            Address during leave                   :9.           House Rent Allowance, Conveyance Allowance or other compensatory
allowance drawn in the present post  :
10.         Nature and period of leave applied for and date from which the same is
required                                       :
11.          Holidays, if any, proposed to be prefixed/suffixed to the said leave  :12.          Purpose for  which leave is applied for  :
13.          Date of return from last leave and the nature and period of that leave   :
*[Substitution  G O(P) No. 535/2003/Fin., Dated 14/10/2003  with effect from  03/11/1997]FORMS
37014.            I undertake to refund the leave salary drawn during ‘leave not due’ which
would not have been admissible had rule 85, Part I Kerala Service Rulesnot been applied in the event of my voluntary retirement or resignationfrom service at any time until I earn half pay leave not less than theamount of leave not due availed of by me.
               Place
Signature of applicant
(with date)
15.          Remarks or recommendation of the Controlling Officer.
Signature (with date)
DesignationKERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
371 *CERTIFICATE  REGARDING  ADMISSIBILITY  OF  LEA VE
[By Accountant General (A&E) in the case of Gazetted Officers]
16.         “Certified that ……………………………………………………... (nature of
leave) for …………………………………. from ……………….. to…………………………… is admissible under rule …………………….. ofthe Kerala Service Rules”.
Signature (with date)
                                                                                                                           Desi gnation
               
†Order of the Sanctioning Authority :
Signature(with date)
Designation
            † If the applicant is drawing any compensatory allowance the sanctioning
authority should state whether on the expiry of leave he is likely to return tothe same post or to another post carrying a similar allowance.
               
†This shall come into force from 3rd November 1997.
*[Substitution G O(P) No. 535/2003/Fin., Dated 14/10/2003  with effect from 03/11/1997]FORMS
372FORM No. 14
OVERTIME  REGISTER
(See Rule 7, APPENDIX IV A)Serial Number
Name and designation of the
Government servant required
to perform overtime work
Emoluments
Hours of overtime work
authorised by the
competent authority
Hours of overtime
work performed by the
Government servant
Nature of work
performed during
overtime hours
1 2 345 6
Initials of the competent
authorityWhy the work could not
be performed during the
prescribed hours of workAmount of overtime
allowance paid
78 9KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
373*FORM No. 15
SERVICE  AND  PAYROLL  ADMINISTRATIVE  REPOSITORY
FOR  KERALA
(See Rule 13 A Part-I)
              Instruction: This form is required to be duly filled up and submitted by the
employees while reporting for duty on fresh appointment. The Officer before
whom the employee reports for duty and the appointing authority are requiredto countersign the duly filled up form submitted by the employee. After gettingthe form countersigned by the appointing authority, the Subject Assistantwill feed the data into Service and Payroll Administrative Repository for Keralaand obtain Permanent Employee Number from the system and write it down in
the box provided below for the purpose.
                Specimen Signature             Specimen Signature
Affix a
recently taken
passport size
photo                PART A (for Office use)
Employee Code
Department Office
                PART B: PERSONAL DETAILS
                (To be filled by the employee)
Name
(In Capital Letters and
Initials after the Name)
   Date of Birth
Name of father
Name of mother
NationalitySex
State                Signature shall not touch the lines
 *[G O(P) No. 413/2009/Fin., Dated 25/09/2009 (with effect from 24/04/2007)]FORMS
374Caste
Category
General/SC/ST/OBC/OEC
Whether ex-servicemen?
(Yes or No)
Voter Identity Card Number
Identification marks of
the employee
Height
Spouse’s Name
Spouse’s Religion
Whether inter religion/caste
marriage?(Yes/No)
Spouse employed in
(specify organization)1.
2.Religion
Whether Physically
handicapped (Yes or No)
PAN Number
Ration Card Number
Martial status
unmarried/married/
divorced
Spouse’s caste
Whether spouse is
employed
                PART C: CONTACT DETAILS
Present  Address Permanent  Address
House No. and
Name
Street Name
Place
Pin
State
District
Taluk
Village
Phone No.Home TownHouse No. and
Name
Street Name
Place
Pin
State
District
Taluk
Village
Phone No.
Home Town
Mobile No. E-mail addressKERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
375              PART D. RECRUITMENT DETAILS
Source (PSC or other
agencies)
Method (Direct/By
transfer)
Advice Memo No.
Whether District
recruitment? (Y/N)
Serial No. in the advice
memo
Appointment Order No.Type (General or Special
recruitment)
Scale of Pay
Advice Memo date
If District recruitment,
Specify the District
Entry category (State service/
State subordinate service)
Appointment Order Date
               PART E: IF ALREADY WORKING IN GOVERNMENT, GIVE DETAILS
             PART F: EDUCATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS
Course Title Subject University/BoardInstitution
studiedClass/
PercentageReg.No.
and YearDepartment
Relieving Order No.
Office last worked
Earlier Advice Memo No.
Earlier  Appointment
Order No.Designation
Relieving Order Date
Earlier Recruiting Agency
Earlier Advice Memo Date
Earlier Appointment
Order DateFORMS
376               PART G: DECLARATION
Declaration
               The information furnished by me in this joining report is correct to the best
of my knowledge and is based on valid documents. I also hereby producethe original documents, in respect of all the information given before thereporting officer for verification. I am also aware of the fact that penal actionwould be taken against me if any of the information provided by me is foundfraudulent.
               Station :             Name:
               Date :      Signature:
               PART H: VERIFICATION (For office use)
               Verified the original documents and found eligible for admission to duty.
                        Name and dated signature of the
                           Reporting Officer
                 Admitted to duty, Employee details may be furnished into SPARK and PEN
obtained.
                                                                        Name and dated signature of the
Appointing Authority.KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
377*FORM NO. 18
OPTION  FOR  FIXATION  OF  PAY
(Rule 28A Part I)
(a)     Consequent upon my promotion as ........................................................... with
effect from........................................FN/AN,  I hereby opt the fixation of pay underrule 28A, in the higher scale of pay of the promoted post, with effect from thedate of promotion, without any review consequent on accural of increment inthe lower scale.
(b)     Consequent upon my promotion as ............................................................ with
effect from FN/AN, I hereby opt the initial fixation of my pay at the stage in thetime scale of pay of the promoted post next above my pay in the scale of pay ofthe lower post on the date of promotion, and thereafter under rule 28A in thehigher scale of pay of the promoted post based on the pay in the lower postwith effect from ............................ i.e., from the date of accural of next incrementin the scale of pay of the lower post.
Place :
Date :Signature
NameDesignationFORMS
* [Inserted G O(P) No. 465/2012/Fin., Dated 17/08/2012 (with effect from 17/08/2012)]
378* [Inserted G O(P) No. 465/2012/Fin., Dated 17/08/2012 (with effect from 17/08/2012)]* FORM NO. 19
REGISTER  OF  CASUAL  LEA VE
( Rule 4, Appendix VII )
Register for Casual Leave for the Year...........................
Name................................                             Desigantion........................
Date of
applicationPeriod of
Casual
Leave
applied forDate of
Commencement TerminationTotal period
of Casual
Leave
availed ofInitials of
Sanctioning
Authority
RemarksKERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II
