GOVERNMENT OF KERALA

T H E   K E R A L A   S E R V I C E   R U L E S

VOLUME I

PART  I & II

EIGHTH EDITION

2016

ISSUED BY THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF KERALA

FINANCE  DEPARTMENT

Official website: www.finance.kerala.gov.in

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

PART I

PAY,  LEAVE,  JOINING TIME,  Etc.

1

CHAP I ]

GENERAL SCOPE

[ RULES 1-2

CHAPTER    I

GENERAL  SCOPE

1.            (i)   These rules may be called the Kerala Service Rules.

                 (ii)    The rules in Part  I  and Part II shall be deemed to have come into force with
effect from 1st November 1959 and those in Part  III shall be deemed to have
come into force from 1st November 1956.

2.           Subject to the provisions of Rule 3,-

                (i)    The rules in Part  II relating to Travelling Allowance shall apply to every

person in the whole time employment of the Government (other than a

person so employed in the contingent or work establishment);

          (ii)  The remaining rules shall apply to every person in the whole time

employment of the Government (other than a person so employed in

the contingent or work establishment),-

                       (a)   who was not in the service of the Government of  Travancore-Cochin
or  the Government of Madras on 31st October 1956, or

                    (b)   who was in the service of the Government of Travancore-Cochin or
the Government of Madras on 31st October 1956 and who continued
to be in the service of the Government of Kerala, but has opted to be

governed by these rules in accordance with such conditions as may

be laid down by the Government in this behalf; or

                  (c)   who was absorbed to Government service on or after 1st November
1956, but who prior to such date was in the service of any quasi-
Government  or  other  institution  and  whose  appointment  and

conditions of service were governed by any law or rule made under

any  law  for  the  time  being  in  force,  if  such  person  exercises  his

option to be governed by these rules, subject to such conditions as

may be laid down by Government in this behalf.

2

CHAP I ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 2-3

              Ruling

              *The rules in Part II, Kerala Service Rules relating to Travelling Allowances

shall  apply  to  the  persons  appointed  to  the  service  of  the  Government

temporarily under Rule 9 of Part II of the Kerala State and Subordinate Service

Rules also.

3.   (i)     These rules shall not apply to,-

             (a)  persons for whose appointment and conditions of employment special

provision is made by or under any law for the time being in force;

               (b)  persons in respect of whose conditions of  service, pay and allowances,

pension,  leave  or  any  of  them,  special  provision  has  been  made  by

agreement  entered  into  before  these  rules  were  made  or  entered  into

thereafter in pursuance of the provisions of Rule 8:

                 Provided that in respect of any matter not covered by the provisions special

to him, his service or his post, these rules shall apply to any person coming

within  the  scope  of  clauses  (a)    and    (b)    above,  to  whom  but  for  those

clauses the rules would otherwise apply.

      (ii)      Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  Rule  2  the  Government  may,  by

notification in the Gazette, exclude wholly or in part from the operation of

these rules any officer or any class of such officers to whom the Government

shall declare that the rules cannot suitably be applied, and these rules shall

thereupon to the extent of such exclusion, cease to apply accordingly.

   ** Note.- These rules as a whole shall not apply to the persons appointed to

the service of the Government temporarily under Rule 9 of Part II of the

Kerala State and Subordinate Service Rules, 1958, except to the extent

specified by the Government.

*[G O(P) No.1082/1987/Fin., Dated 16/12/1987]

**[G O(P) No. 77/1987/Fin., Dated 22/01/1987]

3

CHAP I ]

GENERAL SCOPE

[ RULES 3-7

              Government Decision

                **The direct recruits to the personal staff of the Ministers will be governed
by the service conditions specified in the Special Rules applicable to them
and in respect of any matter not covered by the provisions in such Special
Rules, the provisions in the Kerala Service Rules will apply.

4.              If any doubt arises as to whether these rules apply to any person, the matter
shall be referred to the Government and the decision of the Government
shall be final.

 5.              Nothing in these rules or in any rule made thereunder shall operate to deprive

any person of any right or privilege to which he is entitled,-

                 (a)     by or under any law, or

               (b)    by the terms of any contract or agreement subsisting between such

person and Government on the date these rules come into force.

6.            Subject to the provisions of Rule 5, nothing in these rules or any rule made
under these rules shall operate to affect to the disadvantage of any person
holding a substantive post under Government to whom these rules apply,
the conditions of service in respect of pay, leave, allowances, pension or
any other matter which are applicable to him-

                (a)    on the date these rules came into force, or

             (b)   by virtue of any order or rule made by the Government, unless such

person  gives  his  consent.

7.          Where Government are satisfied that the operation of any rule under these
rules causes undue hardship in any particular case, the Government may
dispense with or relax the requirements of that rule to such extent and subject
to such conditions as they may consider necessary for dealing with the case
in a just and equitable manner.

**[G O(P) No. 68/1965/Fin., Dated 16/02/1965]

4

CHAP I ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 8-9

8.              When in the opinion of the Government, special provisions inconsistent with

any of these rules or of any rules made thereunder are required in respect of

conditions  of  service,  pay  and  allowances,    leave  and  pension  or  any  of

them, with reference to any particular post, it shall be open to the Government,

notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, to provide by agreement

with  the  person appointed to such post for any of the matters in respect of

which in the opinion of the Government special provisions are required to be

made, and to the extent to which such provisions are made in the agreement,

nothing in these rules or in any rules made thereunder shall apply to any
person so appointed in respect of any matter for which provision is made in

the agreement :

            Provided that in every agreement made it shall further be provided that in

respect of any matter in respect of which no  provision has been made in the

agreement, the provisions of these rules or of rules made thereunder shall

apply. (For model form of agreement See Appendix I).

9.              The Government may delegate to any of its officers subject to any conditions

which it may think fit to impose any power conferred upon it by these rules

with the following exceptions :-

                  (a)   power to make rules;

                 (b)   [Deleted];

               (c)   power to regulate the terms and conditions for grant of compensatory

allowances;

                (d)    to determine the standard rent of buildings and the rent recoverable from

an officer occupying the residence;

            (e)    to  remit  leave  and  pension  contributions  in  respect  of  an  officer

transferred on foreign service; and

               (f)    to permit an officer on foreign service to receive pension or gratuity from

foreign employer.

5

CHAP I ]

GENERAL SCOPE

[ RULES 10-11

10.      No powers may be exercised or delegated under these rules except after
consultation with the Finance Department. It shall be open to that Department
to prescribe, by general or special order, cases in which its consent may be
presumed to have been given.

11.           The Government reserve to themselves the power to modify these rules as may

from time to time seem expedient and to interpret them in case of doubt.

              Ruling

                 An officer’s claim to pay and allowances is regulated by the rules in force at
the time in respect of which the pay and allowances are earned; to leave, by
the rules in force at the time the leave is applied for and granted; and to
pension,  by  the  rules  in  force  at  the  time  when  the  officer  resigns  or  is
discharged from the service of the State.

           Persons governed by the Kerala Service Rules who were on leave on the
crucial date, i.e. 1st November 1959, the leave having been sanctioned in
good faith and availed of from a date prior to 1st November 1959 will be
treated to have come over to the leave rules in the Kerala Service Rules on
the  expiry  of  the  first  spell  of  leave  originally  sanctioned.   Any  further
extension of such leave after 1st November 1959 should be regulated only in
terms of the rules in Kerala Service Rules. No arrears will, however, be paid,
nor amounts drawn in excess recovered as a result of such readjustment of
leave.

6

CHAP II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 12

CHAPTER  II

DEFINITIONS

12.       Unless there be something repugnant in the subject or context the terms

defined in this chapter are used in the rules in the sense here explained :-

        (1)    Actual Travelling Expenses.- means the actual cost of transporting an officer
and his personal luggage including charges for ferry and other tolls and for
carriage of camp equipment, if necessary. It does not include charges for
hotels, travellers bungalows or refreshments or for the carriage of stores or
conveyances or for presents to coachmen and the like, or any allowance for
such incidental losses or expenses as the breakage of crockery, wear and tear
of furniture and the employment of servants.

        (2)     Apprentice.- means a person deputed for training with a view to employment in
Government service, who draws pay at monthly rates from Government during
such training, but is not employed in or against a substantive vacancy in the
cadre of a department.

      (3)      Audit Officer.- means the Head of the Office of Accounts and Audit subordinate
to  the  Comptroller  and Auditor  General  of  India,  whether  designated  as
Comptroller or Accountant General or by any other designation.

    (3A)    *Average Pay.-  [Deleted].

       (4)    Cadre.- means the strength of a service or part of a service sanctioned as a

separate unit.

     (5)   Compensatory  Allowance.- means an allowance granted to meet personal
expenditure  necessitated  by  the  special  circumstances  in  which  duty  is
performed. It includes Travelling Allowance.

    (5A)    Competent  Authority.- Competent authority in respect of any officer, in so far
as any power delegated under these rules is concerned, means the authority

*[G O(P) No. 491/1975/Fin., Dated 24/10/1975]

7

CHAP II ]

DEFINITIONS

[ RULE 12

to  which  such  power  has  been  delegated  and  where  no  such  specific
delegation has been made, the competent authority is, unless otherwise stated,
the authority in whom the power to appoint such officer has been or is vested
from time to time by the State Government.

       (6)      Day.- means  a calendar day, beginning and ending at midnight; but an absence
from headquarters which does not exceed 24 hours shall be reckoned for all
purposes as one day, at whatever hours the absence begins or ends.

     (7)     Duty .- Duty includes-

                (i)    Service as a probationer or apprentice, provided that such service is

followed by confirmation.

              (ii)    Joining time.

              (iii)    A course of instruction or training which an officer undergoes specially

ordered by Government to be treated as duty.

                  Note 1.- A student, stipendiary or otherwise, who is entitled to be appointed
to the service of Government on passing through a course of training at
a  University, College or School shall unless in any case it be otherwise
expressly provided in the terms of his appointment, be treated as on
duty  during  the  interval  between  the  satisfactory  completion  of  the
course and his assumption of duties.

   Note 2.- An officer required or permitted to attend an obligatory departmental
examination may be treated as on duty during the day or days of the
examination and during the reasonable time required for the journey, if
any, to and from the place of examination.

               Explanation.

                        *The term ‘obligatory departmental examination’ means-

                 (i)   any test a pass in which is prescribed for the successful completion of
probation or training of an officer, whether recruited direct or by transfer;

*[G O(P) No. 366/1976/Fin., Dated 26/11/1976]

8

CHAP II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 12

                (ii)   any test a pass in which is prescribed for the purpose of making an

officer eligible for increment or for confirmation in any post;

                 (iii)   any test a pass in which is prescribed for promotion to any higher post

coming in the  line of promotion in the department concerned ;

               (iv)   any test a pass in which is prescribed as a qualification for continuance in

the  post;

                (v)   any test a pass in which is newly prescribed for persons already in the

service concerned.

  Note 3.- The period spent on training by officers who are reservists of the

Defence Forces and the period of their journey to and from the training

centre may be treated as duty.

              Ruling

             In all cases of deputation of officers for a course of instruction or training

under these rules, the period of such training, if treated as duty under sub-

clause  (iii)  of  the  above  rule,  should  be  specified  as  such  in  the  orders

sanctioning such deputation. A separate clause that the period will count for

increment, leave and pension is not necessary in such cases. In case where

an officer selected for training is found  unsuitable on medical examination

or  otherwise,  the  period  spent  by  him  in  India  for  journey  for  medical

examination, etc. in connection with the training will be treated as leave and

no Travelling Allowance will be allowed for such journeys

    Note  4.- †When a Government Servant on return from leave, training, foreign
service or on termination of previous appointment, has compulsorily
to wait for orders of  posting, the interval between the date of report

and the date on which he takes charge of his duties shall be treated as

‘duty’ provided that the interval between the date of receipt of orders

†[G O(P) No.475/1975/Fin., Dated 09/10/1975]

9

CHAP II ]

DEFINITIONS

[ RULE 12

and his assumption of duties shall not in any case exceed the amount
of joining time admissible under Rule 125 (a). During such period of
duty, he will be entitled to pay according to Rule 26. Avoidable delay
caused  in  giving  posting  orders  in  such  cases  shall  render  the
authorities concerned, liable for the excess expenditure, if any, caused
thereby.

  * [Omitted]

   Note 6.- When a Government Servant is deputed by Government to participate
in a Civil service Tournament as a member of the team or to participate
in the coaching camps organised in connection thereto, the period spent
for participation in such tournaments/coaching camps, including the
time taken for to and fro journeys will be treated as duty.

              Explanation.-

                          **The term ‘Civil Service Tournament’ shall mean India Civil Services
Tournaments organised by (a) the Central Civil Service Sports Control
Board,  (b)  State Governments on behalf of the above Board and  (c)
Sports Councils or Associations authorised by the State Government,
on behalf of the Central Civil Service Sports Control Board.

              The note shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st July 1980.

      (8)    Fee.- means a recurring or non-recurring payment to an officer from a source
other  than  the  General  Revenues  whether  made  directly  to  the  officer  or
indirectly through the intermediary of Government but does not included-

                  (a)      unearned income, such as income from property, dividends and interests

on securities ; and

              (b)    income from literary, cultural or artistic efforts, if such efforts are not
aided by the knowledge acquired by the officer in the course of his

service.

*[Omitted G O(P) No.78/2007/Fin., Dated 28/02/2007]
**[G O(P) No. 211/1982/Fin., Dated 05/05/1982]

10

CHAP II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 12

     (9)   Foreign Service.- means service in which an officer receives his pay with

sanction of Government from any source other than the Consolidated Fund

of India or of a State.

   (10)   General Revenues.- General Revenues of Kerala include the Consolidated

Fund, the Contingency fund and the Public Account of Kerala and exclude

the revenues of Local Funds.

    (11)    Government.- means the Government of Kerala.

    (12)    Gratuity.- (See Pension)

    (13)    Heads of Departments.- The term includes-

             (a)  Officers who have been declared by the Government to be Heads of

Departments. (See Appendix II)

                   (b)   Any other authority to which the Government may delegate the powers

of a Head of Department.

    (14)    Holiday.- means-

                 (a)    a holiday prescribed or notified by or under section 25 of the Negotiable

Instruments Act, 1881; and

           (b)   in relation to any particular office, a day on which such office is

ordered by notification of Government in the Gazette to be closed

for  the  transaction  of  Government  business  without  reserve  or

qualification.

     (15)    Honorarium.- means a recurring or non-recurring payment granted to an

officer from the General Revenues of the State as remuneration for special

work of an occasional or intermittent character.

   (16)    Joining Time.- means the time allowed to an officer to join a new post or

travel to or from a station to which  he is posted.

11

CHAP II ]

DEFINITIONS

[ RULE 12

 (16 A)   *Last Grade Service.- means service in any post included in the Kerala Last
Grade Service constituted by the Special Rules for the Kerala Last Grade
Service, published under G.O.(P) 82/Public (Rules) Department, dated the 8th
March 1966, in Part I of the Kerala Gazette No.14, dated the 5th April 1966, as
amended from time to time, and includes †all other posts carrying the lowest
scale of pay in the schedule of pay scales in force from time to time and
service in any post declared by the Government  to be a post in the  Last
Grade Service.

      (17)    Leave Salary.- means the monthly amount paid by Government to an officer

on leave.

     (18)    Lien.- means the title of an officer to hold substantively, either immediately
or on termination of a period or periods of absence, a permanent post to
which he has been appointed substantively.

     (19)   Local Fund.- means-

                   (a)    revenues administered by bodies which by law or rule having the force
of law come under the control of Government, whether in regard to
proceedings generally or to specific matters, such as the sanctioning of
their budgets; sanction to the creation or filling up of particular posts,
or the enactment of leave, pension or similar rules;  and

                    (b)     the revenues of any body which may be specially notified by the Government

as such.

     (20)    Ministerial Officer.- means an officer of a subordinate service whose duties
are entirely clerical, and any other class of officer specially defined as such
by general or special orders of Government.

    (21)    Month.- means a calendar month.  In calculating a period expressed in terms
of months and days, complete calendar months, irrespective of the number of

*[G O(P) No. 1060/1979/Fin., Dated 06/12/1979]
†[G O(P) No.626/93/Fin., Dated 04/10/1993]

12

CHAP II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 12

days in each, should first be calculated and the odd number of days calculated
subsequently.

  Note.- Whenever it is necessary to calculate a period  in calendar months,
the  period  shall  be  taken  to  end  either  on  the  day  of  the  month
corresponding to the day before the day on which the period begins or
if there is no such corresponding day in the month, then on the last
day of the month.

  Example.-A period of six calendar months beginning on the 28th February
ends on the 27th August, 31st March ends on the 30th September, 30th or
31st August ends on the 28th February or 29th February, if leap year.

               In calculating a period of 3 months and 20 days from 25th January, 3 months
should be taken as ending on the 24th April and the 20 days on 14th May. In the
same way the period from 30th January to 2nd March should be reckoned as 1
month and 2 days, because one month from 30th January ends on 28th February.
A period of one month and 29 days commencing from 1st January will expire in
an ordinary year (in which February is a month of 28 days) on the last day of
February because a period of 29 days cannot obviously mean to exceed a
period of full calendar month and leave for two months from 1st January would
end on the last day of  February. The same would be the case if February were
a month of  29 days or if the broken period were 28 days (in an ordinary year).

    (22)    Officiate.- An officer officiates in a post when he performs the duties of a
post on which another person holds a lien. The appointing authority may, if
it thinks fit, appoint an officer to officiate in a vacant post on which no other
officer holds a lien.

     (23)   Pay.- means the amount drawn monthly by an officer as-

                 (i)   the pay, other than special pay or pay granted in view of his personal
qualifications,  which  has  been  sanctioned  for  a  post  held  by  him
substantively or in an officiating capacity or to which he is entitled by
reason of his position in a cadre, and

13

CHAP II ]

DEFINITIONS

[ RULE 12

                 (ii)  personal pay and special pay, and

             (iii)  any other emoluments which may be specially classed as pay by the

Government.

    (24)    Pension.-Except when the term ‘Pension’ is used in contradistinction to

gratuity or ‘Death-cum-retirement gratuity’, ‘Pension’ includes ‘gratuity’

and ‘Death-cum-retirement gratuity’.

    (25)   Permanent Post.- means a post carrying a definite rate of pay sanctioned

without limit of time.

     (26)   Personal Pay.- means additional pay granted to an officer-

             (a)   to save him from loss of substantive pay in respect of a permanent
post due to a revision of pay or to any reduction of such substantive

pay otherwise than as a disciplinary measure ; or

             (b)    in exceptional circumstances, on other personal considerations.

   Note.- All cases in which it is proposed to grant personal pay under clause

(b)  of the above rule should be referred to the Finance Department by

the Administrative Department concerned. No case will be entertained

which  is  not  of  an  entirely  exceptional  character  and  in  submitting

cases for the grant of personal pay, this should be carefully borne in

mind.

   (27)   Presumptive Pay of a Post.- When used with reference to any particular

Government servant, means the pay to which he would be entitled if he held

the post substantively and were performing its duties; but it does not include

special pay unless the Government servant, performs or discharges the work

or responsibility in consideration of which the special pay was sanctioned.

  Note.- The first part of the definition is intended to facilitate the use of  the term

in relation to an officer who has been absent from a post  for some time but

still retains a lien on it.

14

CHAP II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 12

  (28)   Probationer.-means an officer employed on probation in or against a

substantive vacancy in the cadre of a department.

    Note  1.-The  term  ‘Probationer’  does  not  cover  an  officer  who  holds
substantively  a  permanent  post  in    a  cadre  and  is  appointed    ‘on
probation’ to another post.

   Note 2.- No person appointed substantively to a permanent post in a cadre
is a probationer unless definite conditions  of  probation have been
attached to his appointment such as the condition that he must remain
on probation pending the passing of certain examinations.

  Note 3.-The status of a probationer is to be considered as having the attributes

of a substantive status except where the rules prescribe otherwise.

  Note  4.-The  instructions  in  Notes  1  and  2  above  are  to  be  taken  as
complementary and not as mutually exclusive. Taken together, they
contain the essence of the tests for determining when an officer should
be regarded as a “Probationer” or as merely “on Probation”, irrespective
of whether he is already a permanent officer or is merely an officer
without  a  lien  on  any  permanent  post.  While  a  probationer  is  one
appointed  in  or  against  a  post  substantively  vacant  with  definite
conditions of probation, a person on probation is one appointed to a
post (not necessarily vacant substantively) for determining his fitness
for eventual substantive appointment to that post.

   (29)    Public Conveyance.-means a train, steamer, bus, boat or other conveyance

which plies regularly for the conveyance of passengers.

    (30)      Qualify - ‘Qualify’ and ‘Count’ means qualify and count for pension, from the

General Revenues or for leave of absence, as the case may be.

    (31)    Special Pay.- means an addition of the nature of pay to the emoluments of a

post or of an officer granted in consideration of the following :-

15

CHAP II ]

DEFINITIONS

[ RULE 12

                (a)     where a post would call for a higher scale of pay in view of the additional

and/or higher responsibilities attached to it, or

               (b)     where the nature of work is specially arduous ;

                                                          or

              (c)    where an officer has to attend to work in addition to normal duties

attached  to  his  post.

  Note .- *When special pay is granted in lieu of a higher time-scale of pay
such special pay will count for purposes for fixation of pay on promotion
to a higher post provided the Officer was drawing it continuously for  a
minimum period of three years on the date of promotion. Special pay in
a tenure post or special pay drawn on deputation will not, however, be
considered for such fixation of pay.

     (32)    Subsistence Allowance.-means a monthly grant made to an officer who is not

in receipt of  pay or leave salary.

   (33)   Substantive Pay.- means the pay other than special pay, personal pay or
emoluments classed as pay by Government under Rule 12 (23) (ii) and  (iii)
above to which an officer is entitled on account of a post to which he has been
appointed substantively or by reason of  his substantive position in a cadre.

  Note .-When a special pay is granted in lieu of a higher time scale, such
special pay will also count as substantive pay, provided the officer
holds a lien on the post to which the special pay is attached.

     (34)    Temporary Post.-means a post carrying a definite rate of pay sanctioned for

a limited  time.

     (35)   Time-scale of Pay.- means pay which, subject to any conditions prescribed in
these rules, rises by periodical increments from a minimum to a maximum. It
includes the class of pay hitherto  known as progressive:-

*[G O(P) No. 393/1975/Fin., Dated 30/08/1975]

16

CHAP II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 12

              (a)    Time-scales are said to be identical if the minimum, the maximum, the
period of increment and the rate of increment of the time-scales are
identical.

                  (b)      A post is said to be on the same time-scale as another post on a time-scale
if the two time-scales are identical and the posts fall within a cadre or a
class in a cadre, such cadre or class having been created in order to fill all
posts, involving duties of approximately the same character or degree of
responsibility, in a service or establishment or group of establishments, so
that  the  pay  of  the  holder  of  any  particular  post  is  determined  by  his
position in the cadre or class and not by the fact that he holds that post.

   Note.- Method of calculation of average pay of a post on a time-scale of pay-

(1)   In the case of gazetted appointments on time-scales of pay the
following formula may be applied for ascertaining the average
pay :-

           Average pay =  (A+B)/2 + (B-A)/2 [1-(R+1) {.014+1- .01R/F-E }]

             Where  A  = Minimum pay,

                 B = Maximum pay,

                 R = Period of rise,

                 E = Average age at entry in the Grade, and

              F =   Average age at retirement on superannuation pension.
This   may be taken to be 55 in almost every case unless
there are special reasons to take it either at a lower or a
higher figure.

(2)      In the case of non-gazetted post on time scales of pay, the following

formula is to be applied :-

                         Average pay = (A+B)/2+(B-A)/2[1-(R+1) {.021+ (1-.015R /F–E)}]

                       Where   A = Minimum pay,

17

CHAP II ]

DEFINITIONS

[ RULE 12

                                      B = Maximum pay,

                                      R = Period of rise,

                                      E = Average age at entry in the Grade, and

                         F = Average age at retirement on superannuation pension.
This may be taken to be 55 in almost every case unless
there are special reasons to take it either at a lower or a
higher figure.

(3)    *In cases where one grade is the channel of promotion to another
grade,  that  is  to  say  where  everybody  in  the  lower  grade  is
ultimately promoted to the higher grade, the following formula
may be adopted to find the average cost of   appointments in  the
lower  grade :-

                       Average pay  =A+C/2+(C-A)/2[1-(S+1) {0.006+(1-0.004S)/G - E }]

                      Where A = Minimum pay,

                              C = Pay just before promotion to the higher grade,

                             S = Period of rise from A to C,

                             E = Average age at entry in the lower grade, and

                                    G = Average age at the time of promotion to the higher grade.

(4)     **If the average pay worked out by any of the methods prescribed,
falls below the minimum of the time-scale plus one forth of the
difference between the minimum and maximum of the time scale,
the average of the minimum and the maximum of the time-scale
shall be taken as the average pay.

               Government Decision

               A scale of pay is reckoned as higher time-scale on the following principles :-

*[G O(P) No. 52/65/Fin., Dated 03/02/1965]
**[G O(P) No.359/1976/Fin., Dated 23/11/1976]

18

CHAP II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 12

                  (i)   according to the higher maximum,

                 (ii)   if the maximum is the same, according to the higher minimum, and

                 (iii)   if the maximum and the minimum are the same according to the rate  of

increment.

     (36)   Transfer.- means the movement of an officer from one headquarter station

in which he is employed to another such station, either,

                 (a)   to take up the duties of a new post, or

                 (b)   in consequence of a change of his headquarters.

     (37)   Travelling Allowance.- means an allowance granted to an officer to cover the

expenses which he incurs in travelling in the interest of the public service. It

includes allowances granted for the maintenance of conveyances.

              Government Decision

               *The expressions ‘road mileage’ and ‘mileage allowance’ wherever they occur,

shall be assigned meaning as referring to ‘distance in kilometres’.

*[G O(P) No. 36/1964/Fin., Dated 20/01/1964]

19

CHAP III ]

GENERAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE

[ RULE 13

CHAPTER  III

GENERAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE

13.       Except as provided by this rule, no person may be appointed to a post in

Government service without his producing a medical certificate of health in

the form annexed below. The Government may, in individual cases, dispense

with the production of a certificate, and may by general orders exempt any

specified class of officers from the operation of this rule.

FORM

                 I do hereby certify that I have examined  A  B,  a candidate for employment in

the ……………………… Department, and cannot discover that he has any

disease, constitutional affection or bodily infirmity except…………… I do

not  consider  this  a  disqualification  for  employment  in  the  office

of………………………..

           A B’s age is according to his own statement  x years and by appearance y

years.

              A B has been re-vaccinated/vaccinated or has/had smallpox.

 Note 1.-The certificate prescribed above must ordinarily be signed by a Civil

Medical Officer of rank not lower than a Civil Surgeon or Honorary

Medical Officer of   Civil Surgeon’s rank or the Director of  Indigenous

Medicine, but in the case of a person whom it is proposed to appoint
to a post the maximum pay of which is not more than *````` 1050 and who
cannot  conveniently  be  brought  before  an  officer  of  higher  rank,  a

certificate from an Assistant Surgeon with M.B.B.S. degree may, at the
discretion of the appointing authority, be accepted.

        *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect

from 1st April 1985.

*[G O(P) No. 1109/1987/Fin., Dated 23/12/1987]

20

CHAP III ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 13

Note 2.- An officer, in whom a defect has been noticed by the Medical Officer
who granted him his first certificate of health, may not be transferred
from the office to which he was originally appointed, to another office,
the duties of which are different in  character, except on production of
another certificate from a competent authority to the effect that the
defect will not materially interfere with the discharge of his new duties
by reason of such transfer.

 Note 3.-The following classes of officers are exempted from producing a medical

certificate of health :-

(1)     an officer recruited through a competitive examination who had to
undergo  medical  examination  in  accordance  with  regulations
prescribed for appointment to service under Government;

(2)   an officer in service other than the last grade appointed in a
temporary vacancy of less than three months duration;

(3)     an officer  in the last grade appointed in a temporary vacancy of less

than six months duration ;

(4)      a temporary officer who has already been medically examined in one
office if transferred to another office without a break in service subject
to the provision of Note 2 above;

(5)    a retired officer re-employed immediately after retirement.

 Note 4.-  (a)  The production of a medical certificate is necessary when-

    (i)   an officer is promoted from non-qualifying service paid from a
Local Fund to a post in Government service other than last grade;

       (ii)     a person is re-employed after resignation or forfeiture of past service;

   (b)   when  a  person  is  re-employed in circumstances other than

those referred to in clause (a) (ii) above the appointing authority

will decide whether a medical certificate should be produced.

21

CHAP III ]

GENERAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE

[ RULE 13

   Note 5.-Once a person is asked to produce a medical certificate of fitness

for  entry  into  Government  service  whether  in  a  temporary  or

permanent capacity and has actually been examined and declared

unfit,  it  is  not  open  to  the  appointing  authorities  subordinate  to

Government to use their discretion to ignore the certificate that has

been  produced.

              Government Decision

            The  question  of  laying  down  appropriate  rules  to  govern  the  Medical
Examination  of  candidates  recruited  to  Government  service  was

considered  by  Government. After  taking  into  account  all  the  relevant

aspects of the question, the following rules have been laid down in this

behalf:

                   1.   Normally a candidate should be medically examined before his first

appointment. In certain cases, however, when a candidate is required

to join immediately for work or for training, the appointment may be

made  without  first  obtaining  the  medical  certificate,  though  the

appointment  should  be  subject  to  the  officer  being  declared

medically fit. In all such cases, if an officer is declared unfit on

medical examination and he prefers an appeal he should be retained

in service till the case is finally decided.

                     2.    Similarly, in the case of a Government servant whose appointment is made

on a temporary basis on the strength of a medical certificate issued by a

lower authority or without such a certificate, it may be necessary to get a

certificate  of  fitness  from  the  appropriate  medical  authority.  If  the
appropriate medical authority finds that the person is not fit for retention

in service at all and if an appeal for a second medical examination from

the Government servant concerned is accepted the person concerned

should be allowed to continue in service till the verdict of appropriate

medical authority is known. In case it is decided not to accede to the

22

CHAP III ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 13

request  for  further  medical  examination,  the  services  of  the  officer

should be terminated forthwith.

                   3.    The intimation regarding unfitness of a candidate should immediately

on receipt be communicated to the person concerned with a note that

appeal, if any, must be made by the candidate/ Government servant

concerned within one month of the communication of the findings of

the Medical Officer and that, if any, Medical certificate is produced as

piece of evidence about the possibility of an error of judgement in the

decision of the Medical Officer who examined him, in the first instance,
the certificate must contain a note by the Medical Officer concerned to

the effect that it has been given in full knowledge of the fact that the

candidate has already been rejected as unfit for service by a Medical

Officer.

               4.   In case no appeal (with requisite evidence in support of his case) is

preferred by the candidate/ Government servant within one month of

the date of communication to him of the findings of the Medical Officer,

his services should be terminated forthwith on the expiry of the period

of one month and ordinarily no appeal should be allowed after the

expiry of that period.

              5.   In case where a Government servant or a candidate for Government

service  is  declared  unfit  for  retention  in  Government  service  or

appointment in the Government service by a Medical Officer, the grounds

for rejection may be communicated to him in broad terms without giving

minute details regarding the defects pointed out by the Medical Officer.

Cases where the grounds of rejection have not been clearly stated by the

Medical Officer, in his report, may be referred to the Government for advice.

                    6.    For the first Medical Examination of the candidate/Government servant

as  well  as  the  subsequent  examinations  found  necessary  by  the

23

CHAP III ]

GENERAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE

[ RULES 13-14

appointing authority on account of an appeal, the appointing authority
shall give suitable requisition to the Medical Officer concerned.

                   7.    No appeal shall lie against the adverse findings of a Medical Officer to

whom the case is referred on appeal.

  Note 1.- Certificate of physical fitness for entry into Government service

should always be from Medical Practitioners of Modern Medicine or

from Doctors of Indigenous Medicine.

  Note 2.- The Medical Authority who is to issue a medical certificate a second
time on appeal shall be of a higher status than the other who issued the

first medical certificate.

  Note 3.- *When a final certificate has been issued either by the Director of

Health  Services,  or  by  the  Director  of  Indigenous  Medicines,  that

certificate will be final and no appeal will be permitted [Vide G.O.(P)
1034/61/Pub. (Ser.D), dated 2nd December 1961 and G.O.(P) 570/62/Pub.
(Ser. D), dated 25th October 1962]

13A      **New recruits shall produce a form for Service and Payroll Administrative

Repository for Kerala (SPARK) in Form No. 15, duly filled up at the time of

joining duty for registering their details.

14.         Unless in any case it be otherwise distinctly provided, the whole time of an

officer is at the disposal of the Government which pays him and he may be

employed in any manner required by proper authority, without claim for

additional remuneration, whether the services required of him are such as

would ordinarily be remunerated from the General Revenues of India or of

the States or the Revenues of a Local Fund or from the funds of a Body,

incorporated or not , which is wholly or substantially owned or controlled

by the Government.

*[G O(P) No. 343/1963/Fin., Dated 07/06/1963]

**[Insertion G O(P) No. 413/2009/ Fin., Dated 25/09/2009 (with effect from 24/04/2007)]

24

CHAP III ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

 [ RULES 14-15

  Note 1.- Every  officer must attend the office punctually. For every three

day’s late attendance without permission, an officer will forfeit a day’s

casual leave for which he is eligible. The computation of the forfeiture

of a day’s casual leave will be with respect to the calendar year and late

attendance without permission for less than three days at the end of a

calendar year will be ignored.

  Note 2.- # No other kind of leave except casual leave shall be forfeited for late

attendance without permission. Disciplinary action under the Kerala

Civil  Services (C.C and  A.) Rules, 1960 may be taken against the

officers concerned for late attendance without permission if there is no

casual leave to be forfeited.

*14 A.    The period  of unauthorized absence of an Officer on account of participation

in strike shall be treated as ‘Dies-Non’.  During the period of ‘Dies-Non’, he

shall not  be eligible for pay and allowances and the period shall not be

counted for admissibility of earned leave.  However, such period shall be

counted for the purposes of increment and half pay leave, notwithstanding

anything contained in any other rules in this part.

               *This  shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 10th January,

2002.

15.  (a)   Two or more officers cannot be appointed substantively to the same permanent

post at the same time.

         (b)   An officer cannot be appointed substantively, except as a temporary measure,

to two or more permanent posts at the same time.

         (c)    An officer cannot be appointed substantively to a post on which another officer

holds a lien.

#[G O(P) No.593/1970/Fin., Dated 20/08/1970]

*[Insertion G O(P) No. 212/2005/Fin., Dated 11/05/2005]

25

CHAP III ]

GENERAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE

[ RULES 16-18

16.      Unless in any case it be otherwise provided in these rules, an officer on

substantive appointment to any permanent post acquires a lien on that post

and ceases to hold any lien previously acquired on any other post.

17.         Unless his lien is suspended under Rule 18 or transferred under Rule 20 an

officer holding substantively  a permanent post retains a lien on that post-

               (a)    while performing the duties of that post;

              (b)   while on foreign service or holding a temporary post, or officiating in

another  post;

                (c)    during joining time on transfer to another post, unless he is transferred

substantively to a post on lower pay, in which case his lien is transferred

to the new post from the date on which he is relieved of his duties in the

old  post;

                (d)    while on leave;

               (e)    while under suspension; and

                 (f)   while under training.

18.  (a)  The Government shall suspend the lien of an officer on a permanent post

which  he  holds  substantively  if    he  is  appointed  in  a  substantive

capacity—

                 (1)    to a permanent post outside the cadre on which he is borne, or

                 (2)    provisionally to a post on which another officer would hold a lien had

his lien not been suspended under this rule.

    (b)  The Government may, at their option, suspend the lien of an officer on a

permanent post which he holds substantively, if he is transferred to foreign

service  or  in  circumstances  not  covered  by  clause  (a)  of  this  rule,  is

transferred,  whether  in  a  substantive  or  officiating  capacity  to  a  post  in

another cadre, and in any of these cases there is reason to believe that he

26

CHAP III ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 18

will remain absent from the post on which he holds a lien for a period of not

less than three years.

               Ruling

               *The lien of an officer on a permanent post should not be suspended when

he is appointed to a higher post in a different cadre, in case the higher post

falls within the regular line of promotion from the lower post.

       (c)      if an officer’s lien on a post is suspended under clause (a) or  (b) of this rule, the

post may be filled substantively, and the officer appointed to hold it substantively,

shall acquire a lien on it; provided that the arrangements shall be reversed as

soon as the suspended lien revives.

   Note.-When a post is filled substantively under this clause, the appointment

will be termed a provisional appointment, the officer appointed will

hold  a  provisional  lien  on  the  post  and  that  lien  will  be  liable  to

suspension under clause (a)  but not under (b) of this rule.

       (d)     an officer’s lien which has been suspended under clause (a) of this rule shall

revive as soon as he ceases to hold a lien on a post of the nature specified in

sub-clause (1) or (2) of that clause.

      (e)     an officer’s lien which has been suspended under clause (b)  of this rule shall

revive  as  soon  as  he  ceases  to  be  on  foreign  service  or  to  hold  a  post  in

another cadre, provided that a suspended lien shall not revive because the

officer takes leave, if there is reason to believe that he will on return from

leave, continue to be on foreign service or to hold a post in another cadre and

the total period of absence on duty will not fall short of three years or that he

will hold substantively a post of the nature specified in sub-clause  (1)  or (2)

of  clause (a).

*[G O(P) No. 102/1966/Fin., Dated  25/03/1967]

27

CHAP III ]

GENERAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE

[ RULES 18-21

   Note.-When it is known that an officer on transfer to  post outside his cadre

is due to retire on superannuation pension within three years of his

transfer, his lien on the permanent post cannot be suspended.

19.(a)    An officer’s lien on a post may in no circumstances be terminated, even with

his consent, if the result will be to leave him without a lien or a suspended

lien upon a permanent post.

     (b)     In a case covered by sub-clause (2) of clause (a) of Rule 18, the suspended lien

may not, except on the written request of the officer concerned, be terminated
while the officer remains in Government service; provided that it shall be open to

the competent authority to refuse consent for the confirmation or retention of an

officer in a permanent post outside the cadre on which he is borne unless he

makes a written request that his lien  on the permanent post in his parent office

should be terminated.

20.         Subject to the provisions of Rule 21 the Government may transfer to another

permanent post in the same cadre the lien of an officer who is not performing

the duties of the post to which the lien relates, even if that lien has been

suspended.

21.(a)      The Government may transfer an officer from one post to another; provided that,

except-

                (1)    on account of inefficiency or misbehavior, or

                (2)    on his written request,

               an officer shall not be transferred substantively to, or except in a case covered

by Rule 58, appointed to officiate in  a post carrying less pay than the pay of the
permanent post on which he holds a lien, or would hold a lien had his lien not

been suspended under Rule 18.

       (b)    Nothing contained in clause (a) of this rule or in clause (18) of Rule 12 shall

operate to prevent the transfer of an officer to the post on which he would

28

CHAP III ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 21-22A

hold a lien, had it not been suspended in accordance with the provisions of

clause (a)  of Rule 18.

   Note.- Permanent transfers from a higher to lower scale in anticipation of the

abolition of a post are not transfers within the meaning of the above

rule.

22.            An officer may be required to subscribe to a provident fund, a family pension

fund or similar fund in accordance with such rules as the Government may by

order prescribe.

   Note 1.- An officer who has entered service before the 19th August, 1976,
may, however, opt to subscribe for a policy in the official Branch of the

State Life Insurance instead of the Provident Fund.

   Note 2.- *Officers who are subscribers to the Family Benefit Scheme, going

on deputation/foreign service shall continue to subscribe to the Family

Benefit Scheme and they themselves shall arrange for effecting recovery

and remittance of the amount from their pay.

#22A.    Any person who  enters Government Service on or after 19th August, 1976
and has not crossed the age of 50 years, shall within a period of †one month
from  the date of such entry in service, subscribe to a policy in the official

branch of the State Life Insurance at such rate as may be determined by

Government from time to time and shall continue to subscribe till he ceases

to be in Government Service.

             This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 5th

April, 1999.

* [G O(P) No. 83/1980/Fin., Dated 23/01/1980]

# [Substitution G O(P) No. 511/2004/Fin., Dated 02/11/2004]

†[Substitution G O(P) No.229/2012/Fin Dated 19/04/2012 (with effect from 16/12/2008)]

29

CHAP III ]

GENERAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE [ RULES 22A-22C

   Note.- *When an employee crosses one pay range to the next higher range,

he shall take additional policy within 2 years of his coming to the next

higher pay range. But this condition shall not apply to an employee

who has attained the age of 45 years at the time of crossing over to the

next higher range.

22  B.        #Any  person  who  enters  Government  service  on  or  after  the  1st  day  of
September, 1984 and has not crossed the age of 50 years, shall within a

period of one year from the date of entry in service enrol as a member of

Group Insurance Scheme and subscribe to the scheme at such rate as may
be  determined  by  Government  from  time  to  time  and  shall  continue  to

subscribe till he ceases to be in Government Service.

    @Note.-  Officers who are subscribers to the Group Insurance Scheme going
on deputation/foreign service shall continue to subscribe to the scheme

and  they  shall  arrange  for  effecting  recovery  and  remittance  of  the
amount from their pay.

   This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force on the 6th day of July,

2002.

**22 C.  An Officer, who wishes to get his prior service, whether provisional or regular ,

in  any  department/institution,  counted  for  any  service  benefit  on  entering

Government service, shall apply for the same before the competent authority/

Government within a period of five years of the date of his entry in Government

service. Under no circumstances, such orders shall be issued by the Competent

Authority/Head of Department/Government within a period less than five years

before the date of retirement on superannuation:

*[G O(P) No. 83/1980/Fin., Dated 23/01/1980]

#[Substitution G O(P) No.78/2010/Fin., Dated 19/02/2010 (with effect from 24/04/2006)]

@ [Insertion G O(P) No. 56/2006/Fin., Dated 03/02/2006]

**[Insertion G O(P) No. 496/2007/Fin  Dated 11/10/2007]

30

CHAP III ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 22C-23

                Provided that an Officer who is already in service, shall be entitled to prefer

such claim within two years from the date of effect of this rule, and in which

case, the concerned Head of Department and appointing authority shall take

a decision on the above claim within a period of three years from the date of

receipt of the claim or  within a period of two years before the date of retirement

on superannuation of the officer, which ever is later:

               Provided further that this rule shall not apply to such Officers who are
already in service and will superannuate on or before 31st December, 2011.

                 **This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force on the 6th day of

November, 2006.

 23. (a)  Subject to any exceptions specifically made in these rules, an officer shall

begin to draw the pay and allowances attached to his tenure of a post with

effect from the date he assumes the duties of that post, and shall cease to

draw them as soon as he ceases to discharge those duties. If the charge is

transferred afternoon, the transfer does not affect pay and allowances until

the next day.

   Exception.-*An officer deputed for a course of  instruction or training which

is ordered to be treated as duty, if promoted to a higher post in the

regular line during such course of instruction or training, may draw the

pay thereof, without joining it, the benefit of promotion being given

from the date his junior assumes charge of the higher post.

      (b)     If, however, the substantive appointment of an officer is changed while he is

officiating in an appointment, or if, while so officiating, an officer is appointed

for the first time, to some substantive office, then, provided that the tenure of

his  officiating  appointment  is  not  interrupted  by  his  new  substantive

appointment, he may draw the pay thereof without joining it from the date on

**[Insertion G O(P) No. 496/2007/Fin  Dated 11/10/2007]

*[G O(P) No. 434/1965/Fin., Dated 17/11/1965]

31

CHAP III ]

GENERAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE

[ RULE 23

which he is appointed thereto, or from any later date on which the substantive

office becomes vacant.

    *(c)     In the case of notional promotions back arrears of pay and allowances are not

admissible.

      (d)     Promotions which do not involve change of duties shall have effect from the

date  of  occurrence  of  vacancy,    or  the  date  of  acquiring  eligibility  for

promotions, whichever is later,  but monetary  benefit shall be admissible only

for a maximum period of one year prior to the date of order of promotion.

  Note.- The detailed procedure to be followed when an officer assumes or

relinquishes charge of an office is contained in  Appendix III.

               Government Decision No. 1

            Questions have been raised regarding the authority competent to accept a

resignation, the circumstances under which resignation should be accepted,

the date when a resignation becomes effective, and the authority competent

to  permit  a  Government  servant  to  withdraw  a  resignation  which  he  has

already tendered. The following instructions will be followed :

                  (a)     Authority competent to accept resignation.- The appointing authority

in respect of the service or post in question is the authority competent

to accept the resignation of the Government servant.

                (b)    Circumstances under which resignation should be accepted.- It is not

in the interest of Government to retain an unwilling officer in service.

The general rule, therefore, is that resignation from service should be

accepted after settling the liabilities outstanding against the Government
servant, except in the circumstances indicated below:-

(i)     Where the officer concerned is engaged on work of importance and

it would take time to make alternative arrangements for filling the

*[Insertion G O(P) No. 629/2010/Fin., Dated  25/11/2010 (with effect from 01/03/2007)]

32

CHAP III ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 23

post,  the  resignation  should  not  be  accepted  straight  away,  but
only, when alternative arrangements for filling the post have been
made.

(ii)    Where a Government servant who is under suspension submits a
resignation,  the  competent  authority  should  examine  with
reference to the merits of the disciplinary case pending against
the Government servant whether it would be in the public interest
to accept the under suspension.   Exceptions to this rule would be
where the alleged offences do not involve moral turpitude or where
the quantum of evidence against the accused officer is not strong
enough  to  justify  the  assumption  that  if  the  departmental
proceedings  were  continued,  the  officer  would  be  removed  or
dismissed from service or where the departmental proceedings
are likely to be so protracted that it would be cheaper to the Public
Exchequer to accept the resignation.

                    (c)     Date when a resignation becomes effective.—The competent authority
should decide the date with effect from which the resignation should
become effective. In cases covered by (b) (i)  above the date should be
that with effect from which alternative arrangements can  be made for
filling the post. Where an officer is on leave, the competent authority
should decide whether he will accept the resignation with immediate
effect or with effect from the date following the termination of the leave.
There  is  also  no  objection  to  a  Government  servant  on  leave  being
permitted to resign his post without rejoining duty after leave, provided
the  appointing  authority  so  decides  with  due  regard  to  the
administrative convenience of the department. Where a period of notice
is prescribed which a Government servant should give when he wishes
to resign from service the competent authority may decide to count the
period of leave towards the notice period. In other cases also it is open
to the competent authority to decide whether the resignation should

33

CHAP III ]

GENERAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE

[ RULES 23-24

become effective immediately or with effect from some prospective

date. In the latter case, the date should be specified.

                  (d)      †Authority  competent  to  permit  withdrawal  of  resignation.-  A
resignation becomes effective when it is accepted and the officer is

relieved of his duties. Where a resignation has not become effective

and the officer wishes to withdraw it, it is open to the authority which

accepted the resignation either to permit the officer to withdraw the

resignation  or  to  refuse  the  request  for  such  withdrawal.  Where,

however, a resignation has become effective, the officer is no longer in
Government service and acceptance of the request for withdrawal of

resignation  would  amount  to  re-employing  him  in  service  after

condoning the period of break.

          Concurrence of ‘Finance’, and the Public Service Commission, wherever

necessary, should be obtained before a request for withdrawal of resignation

which has already become effective, is accepted.

               Government Decision No.2

            **Condonation of the period of break and revival of past service in such

cases will be for the purpose of pension only, if it is otherwise admissible.

The Government servant’s earlier service will not count for fixation of pay,

increment or leave. His pay will be fixed at the minimum of the scale of pay of

the post to which he is re-employed after resignation and the period of break

will be treated as a period spent out of employment.

24.         Unless the Government in view of the special circumstances of the

case, otherwise determine, after five years’ continuous absence from

duty,  an  officer  shall  be  removed  from  service  after  following  the

†[G O(P) No. 98/1965/Fin., Dated  22/03/1965]

**[G O(P) No. 82/1966/Fin., Dated  03/03/1966]

34

CHAP III ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 24-24A

procedure  laid  down  in  the  Kerala  Civil  Services  (Classification,

Control and Appeal) Rules, 1960, * except in cases covered by Rule

24A.

             * This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect

from 16th December, 1983.

*24A.    Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, if an officer who availed

himself of leave without allowances to take up employment abroad or within
the country **[or for joining spouse] for a total period of † twenty years,
whether  continuously  or  in  broken  periods,  does  not  return  to  duty

immediately on the expiry of the leave, his service shall be terminated after

following the procedure laid down in the Kerala Civil Services (Classification,

Control and Appeal) Rules, 1960.

   Note.- This rule shall have effect from the 16th day of December, 1983 and
shall apply to all cases of grant of leave without  allowances on or  after

that date, for taking  up employment abroad or within the country, in

extension of the leave already granted or otherwise, and such leave
granted before that date shall be reckoned for applying the †twenty
years limit.

              *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from

16th December 1983.

              †  This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force witheffect from

5th February, 1996.

*[G O(P) No. 953/1986/Fin., Dated 27/12/1986]

**[G O(P) No. 1002/1997/Fin., Dated 06/11/1997]

†[G O(P) No.637/2002/Fin., Dated 19/10/2002]

35

CHAP IV ]

PAY

[ RULES 25-26

CHAPTER  IV

PAY

25.         Except in the case of personal pay granted in the circumstances defined in

Rule 12 (26)  (a), the pay of an officer shall not be so  increased as to exceed

the pay  sanctioned  for his  post without the sanction of Government.

26.          When an officer is treated as on duty under Rule 12 (7) (iii), the Government

may,  at their option, authorise payment to him of the pay of his substantive

appointment or of any lower rate of pay which they may consider suitable,
provided that the pay admissible may, if the Government so direct, be instead

of either of the rates just specified, the pay of any officiating appointment

which the officer would have drawn but for undergoing such training, subject

however  to  the  condition  that  this  rate  of  pay  shall  not  be  allowed  for  a

period longer than that for which the officer would have held the officiating
appointment had he not been placed on such course of training.

   Note 1.- A reservist of the Defence Services in the employment of the State

Government, when called up for periodical training, receives the pay

and allowances to which he is entitled under the Defence Services. He

will also receive the excess, if any, of his pay under the Government

over the pay under Defence Department. The periods spent in training

and on the journey to and from the place of training will be treated as

duty for purposes of leave, increments and pension.

   Note 2.- *The expressions “the pay of his substantive appointment” and

“the pay of any officiating appointment” occurring in the above rule

should be taken to mean “the pay which the officer would have drawn

in  the  post  which  he  holds  substantively”  and  “the  pay  which  the

officer  would  have  drawn  in  the  officiating  appointment  but  for

undergoing  the  training’’.  In  neither  case,  is  there  any  restriction  to

*[G O(P) No. 434/1965/Fin., Dated 17/11/1965]

36

CHAP IV ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 26-28

draw the following kinds of emoluments which the officer would have
drawn in the substantive or officiating appointment but  for the training

                (i)    Basic pay

               (ii)    Special pay granted in lieu of a higher time-scale of pay

              (iii)    Personal  pay

            (iv)   Any other emoluments specially classed as pay and which are

specifically allowed to be drawn during training

               (v)    Dearness pay

              (vi)    Dearness allowance

             (vii)    House rent allowance

               Ruling

An officer holding a provisional appointment deputed for training where
the period of training is treated as duty will be allowed to draw for the period
of training the  pay and allowances attached to the provisional appointment,
if it is certified by the competent authority that the officer would have held
the provisional appointment but for his deputation for training.

27.          Rules 28  to  37 apply to time-scale of pay generally. They do not, however
apply to any time-scale sanctioned by the Government in so far as they are
inconsistent with terms specially so sanctioned for such time-scale.

28.          The initial substantive pay of an officer who is appointed substantively to a

post on a time-scale of pay is regulated as follows :

               If he holds a lien on a permanent post or would hold a lien on such a post
had his lien not been suspended, he will draw as initial pay the stage of the
time-scale next above his substantive pay in respect of the old post :

               Provided that except in cases of re-employment after resignation or removal or
dismissal from public service, if he either has previously held substantively or

37

CHAP IV ]

PAY

[ RULE 28

officiated in (i)  the same post, or (ii) a permanent or temporary post on the same

time-scale, or (iii) a permanent post on an identical time-scale or a temporary post

(including a post in a body, incorporated or not, which is wholly or substantially

owned or controlled by the Government) on an identical time-scale then the

initial pay shall not, except in cases of reversion to the parent cadre governed by

item (iii) above be less than the pay which he drew on the last such occasion and

he shall count the period during which he drew that pay on such last and any

previous occasions for increment in the stage of the time-scale equivalent to

that pay. The service rendered in a post referred to in item (iii) shall, on reversion
to the parent cadre, count towards initial fixation of pay, to the extent and subject

to the conditions indicated below:-

                 (a)    The officer should have been approved for appointment to the particular

grade/post in which the previous service is to be counted;

                  (b)      All his seniors, except those regarded as unfit for such appointment, were

serving in posts carrying the scale of pay in which the benefit is to be

allowed or in higher posts, whether in the department itself or elsewhere,

and at least one junior was holding a post in the department carrying the

scale of pay in which the benefit is to be allowed; and

               (c)    the service will count from the date his junior is promoted and the

benefit will be limited to the period the officer would have held the

post in his parent cadre had he not been appointed to the ex-cadre

post.

    Note  1.-  The  provisions  in  the  above  rule  apply  in  cases  of  substantive

appointments  to  higher  time-scales  of  pay  only.  In  other  cases  the

officer’s pay in the new appointment shall be fixed at his pay in the

previous appointment, if it is a stage in the new scale or at next lower

stage, if it is not a stage in the  new scale, the difference being treated

as personal pay, such personal pay, being absorbed in future increases

of pay. This will not, however, apply to cases of reversions.

38

CHAP IV ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 28-28A

    Note  2.-  The  provisions  in  item  (iii)  of  the  proviso  to  the  above  rule  in

respect of protection of pay and period of increment shall be applicable

to Government servants on their appointment directly or on transfer

from a post carrying identical time-scale of pay without fulfilment of

the conditions indicated thereunder subject to the condition that this

benefit will not be admissible to an individual who enters Government

service for the first time from a post in a body incorporated or not

which is wholly or substantially owned or controlled by Government.

28A.      Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, where an officer holding
a  post  in  a  substantive,  temporary  or  officiating  capacity  is  promoted  or

appointed in a substantive, temporary or officiating capacity to another post

carrying a higher time-scale of pay, his initial pay in the higher time-scale of

pay, shall be fixed at the stage next above the pay notionally arrived at in the

lower time-scale of pay by increasing the actual pay drawn by him in the

lower time-scale by one increment. *He shall be given opportunity to opt any

date for fixation of pay in the  higher time scale of pay from the following

options, namely:-

              Option (a)—Pay will be fixed in the higher time scale of pay, on the date of

promotion, under this rule.  Next increment in the higher time scale will fall due

only on completion of one year from the date of such fixation of pay.

                                                          OR

               Option (b)—Pay on the date of promotion will be initially fixed at the stage

of higher time scale of pay of the promoted post next above the pay in the

lower time scale of pay.  Thereafter fixation of pay under the rule will be
allowed based on the pay in the lower post on the date opted by the promotee,

i.e., on the date of increment in the lower post.  Next increment will fall due

only on completion of one year from the date of fixation of pay under this rule.

*[Substitution G O(P) N0. 630/2010/Fin., Dated 25/11/2010 (with effect from 26/03/2006)]

39

CHAP IV ]

PAY

[ RULE 28A

If the fixation of pay under this rule on the date of option does not make any

change in the pay in  the higher time scale, the pay will remain at the same

stage till completion of one year from the date of initial fixation (date of

promotion) of pay in the higher time scale.  Next increment in such cases will

be allowed on the completion of one year from the date of initial fixation of

pay in the higher time scale of pay.

                The competent authority shall incorporate in the promotion order a provision

to the effect that the officer shall exercise option within one month from the

date of order of promotion or of taking  charge in the promoted post whichever
is later.  The option under this rule shall be in # Form No. 18.

              Provided that the provisions of this rule shall not apply to promotions *to

posts carrying a scale of pay, the minimum pay of which exceeds ````` 20700.

            This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from

26th  March 2006.

               † The limit of ````` 550 has been revised to ````` 650 with effect from 1st January
1966 [G.O. (P) 261/67/Fin., dated 4th July 1967, G.O.(P) 91/68/Fin., dated 5th
March 1968] and ````` 650 to ````` 900 with effect from 1st July 1968 [G.O. (P) 173/
70/Fin., dated 20th March 1970] and from ````` 900 to ````` 1200 with effect from
1st July 1973 [G.O. (P) 136/75/Fin., dated 1st April 1975 and from ````` 1,200 to
````` 1,550 with effect from 1st July 1978[G.O.(P) 493/79/Fin., dated 28th May
1979] and from ````` 1550 to ````` 2100 with effect from 1st July, 1983 [G.O.(P)
1109/87/Fin. dated 23rd December 1987] and from ````` 2100 to ````` 2640 with
effect from 1st July 1988 [G.O.(P) 1005/92/Fin. dated 27th November, 1992
**and from ````` 12,600 to `````  20700 with effect from 26th March, 2006 [G.O.(P)
145/2006/Fin., dated 25th March, 2006]

* [Substitution G O(P) No. 630/2010/Fin., Dated. 25/11/2010]

# [Substitution G O(P) No. 465/2012/Fin., Dated. 17/08/2012 (with  effect  from 17/08/2012) ]

† [G O(P) No. 624/1984/Fin., Dated 29/10/1984]

40

CHAP IV ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 28A

               **Provided also that where a Government servant is immediately before his

promotion or appointment to a higher post,  drawing pay at the maximum of

the time-scale of the lower post, his initial pay in the time-scale of the higher

post shall be fixed at the stage next above the pay notionally arrived at by

increasing his pay in respect of the lower post by an amount equal to the last

increment in the time-scale of the lower post.

               Effective from the date of order.

                 # Provided that if he has either previously held substantively or officiated in
(i) the same post or (ii) a permanent or temporary post on the same time-scale

or (iii) a permanent post on an identical time-scale or a temporary post on an

identical time-scale, such post being on the same time-scale as a permanent

post, then the initial pay shall not be less than the pay which he drew, on the

last such occasion and he shall count for  increment the period during which

he drew that pay on such last or any previous occasions.

              This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with  effect from

21st July 1964.

               Ruling  No.1

                In cases where the application of the rule would give rise to anomalies in as

much as an officer officiating  in a higher post could get his pay refixed at a

stage higher than the pay drawn by another who stands confirmed in the

higher post on the same scale of pay, the anomaly will be removed by refixing

the pay of the senior officer at the stage equal to that fixed for the junior

officer  in  the  higher  post,  the  orders  of  refixation  being  issued  by  the

competent authority under Rule 34, Part I, Kerala Service Rules. The refixation

of pay in such cases will be made subject to the following conditions:

** [G O(P) No. 348/1975/Fin., Dated 01/08/1975]

# [G O(P) No.710/1970/Fin., Dated  05/10/1970]

41

CHAP IV ]

PAY

[ RULE 28A

             (a)  Both the junior and senior officers should belong to the same

cadre  and  the  post  in  which  they  have  been  promoted  or

confirmed, as the case may be, should be identical and in the

same cadre.

                 (b)   The scale of pay of the lower post in which they would have drawn

their pay but for their promotion or confirmation should be identical.

               (c)   The anomaly should be directly as a result of the application of Rule

28A. For example, if the junior officer draws from time to time a higher
rate of pay than the senior by virtue of fixation of pay under the normal

rules or any advance increment granted to him, the provision contained

in this ruling should not be involved to step up the pay of the senior

officer.

               (d)   The refixation of pay of the senior officer should be done with effect

from the date of refixation of pay of the junior officer. The next increment

of the senior officer will however be drawn on the date on which it

would have fallen due but for this refixation of pay.

               Ruling No.2

              *In the case of a Government servant, officiating in a post and whose pay had

been refixed under this rule, if he is confirmed in that post with effect from a

retrospective date, the refixation of pay done after the date of confirmation will

have to be revised. The over payments consequent on such revision will first be

set off against the arrears, if any, that might become payable to the Government

servant for a portion of the period from the date of confirmation to the date of

issue of orders of confirmation. The balance of overpayments that cannot be set

off against the arrears, if any, shall be waived.

                    This Ruling will be deemed to have come into force with effect from 3rd February

1962.

*[G O(P) No. 24/1965/Fin., Dated 13/01/1965]

42

CHAP IV ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 28A

               Ruling No. 3

                *The refixation of pay in the higher officiating post on the date of change of

pay in the lower time-scale contemplated in this rule cannot be allowed during

the period of bar on increment with or without cumulative effect. But, in the

cases of bar on increment without cumulative effect there is no objection to

give the refixation on a notional basis and to give the monetary benefit after

the expiry of the period of bar. Increments accruing in the lower substantive/

officiating post from time to time cannot also be allowed during the period of

bar.

               Ruling No. 4

                  **Increments  barred  with  or  without  cumulative  effect  in  the  lower

substantive officiating post shall not be reckoned for fixation/refixation

of pay in the higher time-scale. But in the case of bar on increment without

cumulative effect, there is no objection to grant the barred increments

notionally for fixation/refixation of pay and to give the monetary benefit

after the expiry of the period of bar.

               Ruling No. 5

                    #  A  revision  of  pay  as  contemplated  in  Ruling  No.2  shall  not  be

necessary in the case of retrospective confirmation ordered after the

date of retirement of an officer.

               This ruling will be deemed to have taken effect from 3rd February 1962.

               Government Decision No. 1

           1.   The provisions of this rule will not apply to cases of revision of scales of pay

referred to in Rule 30 ibid.

* [G O(P) No.650/1972/Fin., Dated 12/12/1972]
**[G O(P) No. 150/1977/Fin., Dated 17/05/1977]

 # [G O(P) No. 79/1975/Fin., Dated 03/03/1975]

43

CHAP IV ]

PAY

[ RULE 28A

       2.  * An officer officiating in a post, when appointed to a higher post on the
advice of the Public Service Commission or otherwise is eligible for his initial
pay being fixed under this rule and  is also entitled to the benefit of a refixation
contemplated in the last sentence of the rule.

                 Effective from 31st October, 1986.

          3.   When a person who holds a post in a regular capacity is appointed to a post
on a higher time-scale in the same service under Rule 31 or in a different
service under Rule 9 of Kerala State  and Subordinate Services Rules, fixation
of pay under this rule is permissible with reference to the pay drawn in the
regular appointment

       4.   When a fresher is appointed provisionally to a post otherwise than on the
advice of the Public Service Commission, under Rule 9 of Kerala State and
Subordinate Service Rules and again appointed to a still higher post under
the same rule, a fixation of pay in the higher post with reference to the pay
drawn in the lower post is not admissible.

          5.    A person holding a post in a regular capacity is appointed provisionally to a
post in the same service under Rule 31 of the Kerala State and Subordinate
Service Rules. He is again appointed to a still higher post in the same service
under Rule 31 or to a post in another service under Rule 9 of Kerala State and
Subordinate Services Rules. Fixation of pay with reference to the provisional
pay drawn in the post to which he was appointed provisionally at first is not
admissible in the other posts.

               †[The decisions 1,3,4 and 5 above will be deemed to have taken effect from

3rd February 1962, the date on which the rule came into force]

      6.   **The pay drawn by an officer in an ex-cadre post can be counted for
purpose of initial fixation of pay on promotion in the parent department.

* [G O(P) No. 475/1990/Fin., Dated  25/09/1990]
† [G O(P) No. 06/1965/Fin., Dated  04/01/1965]
**[G O(P) No. 580/1970/Fin., Dated 13/08/1970]

44

CHAP IV ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 28A

But  the  benefit  of  refixation  of  pay  contemplated  in  the  rule  is  not

admissible  to  him  as  he  loses  connection  with  the  ex-cadre  post  on

appointment to the parent department.

       7.       # The benefit of pay drawn in an ex-cadre post for purpose of initial fixation will not be

admissible, if an officer is reverted to the parent department, to a post carrying a scale

of pay lower than that of the ex-cadre post.

               Government Decision No. 2

                The benefit of refixation of pay contemplated in the last sentence in the first

para of the rule is admissible even in cases where the change of pay is due to

fixation of pay on account of revision of scale of pay. If both the lower and

the higher time-scales are revised, the benefit will be restricted to the cases

of options exercised in respect of both the posts simultaneously.

               Government Decision No. 3

            † Notional increment at the biennial increment shall be reckoned in the lower

scale for fixation of pay in the higher scale under Rule 28A.

               This decision shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st July 1973.

               Government Decision No. 4

           *The benefit of reckoning notional increment beyond the maximum of the

scale of pay of the lower post will also be admissible in cases where an

employee reaches the maximum of the post in the lower time-scale of pay

before he gets an increment in the scale of pay of the higher post  and in

such cases, he will be eligible for a refixation consequent on the change of
pay in the lower time-scale.

# [G O(P) No.223/1977/Fin., Dated 14/07/1970]

† [G O(P) No.458/1975/Fin., Dated 26/09/1975]

*[G O(P) No.274/1978/Fin., Dated 14/03 /1978]

45

CHAP IV ]

PAY

[ RULES 28A-30

             This decision shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st

August 1975.

              Government Decision No. 5

               [Deleted]

              **The amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with  effect from

25th June, 1986.

29.          The initial substantive pay of an officer who is appointed substantively to a

post on a time-scale of pay which has been reduced for reasons other than

a diminution in the duties or responsibilities attached to posts thereon and

who is not entitled to draw pay on the time-scale as it stood prior to reduction,

is regulated by Rule 28.

30.           The holder of a post, the pay of which is changed, shall be treated as if he were

transferred to a new post on the new pay; provided that he may at his option

retain  his  old  pay  until  the  date  on  which  he  has  earned  his  next  or  any

subsequent increment in the old scale, or until he vacates his post or ceases

to draw pay in that time-scale. The option once exercised is final.

   Note 1.-This rule applies to an officiating holder of a post as well. But any

break in the officiating period such as that due to transfer to another

post, or non-employment would operate as vacating of the post and

the pay during a subsequent officiating period in the same post will be

fixed only as if the officer was then appointed to the new scale of pay.

‘The holder of a post’ occurring  in this rule applies also to a person

who  is  not  actually  holding  the  post,  the  pay  of  which  is  changed,

provided he has a lien or a suspended lien on that post.

               The words ‘his old pay’ in the proviso of the rule should be held to include

not only the rate at which the individual was drawing his officiating pay on

**[G O(P) No.475/1990/Fin., Dated  25/09/1990]

46

CHAP IV ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 30

the crucial date but also the time-scale of pay in which he was drawing that

pay. Thus  for  the  period  of  option  the  old  scale  of  pay  in  which  he  was

drawing his officiating pay should be treated as continuing for the individual

concerned.

   Note 2.- Option under the proviso of the rule to officers under suspension is

governed by the following :-

                   1.    Cases in which the revised scale of pay takes effect from a date prior to

the date of suspension.

    In such cases the officer should be allowed to exercise the option

under Rule 30 even if the period, during which he is to exercise

the option, falls within the period of suspension. He will be entitled

to the benefit of increase in pay if any,  in respect of the duty

period before suspension, and also in the subsistence allowance,

for the period of suspension, as a result of such option.

                  2.   Cases in which the revised scale of pay takes effect from a date falling

within the period of  suspension -

(a)    Under suspension an officer retains a lien on his substantive post.

As the expression ‘holder of a post’ occurring in Rule 30 includes

also a person who holds a lien or a suspended lien on the post

even though he may not be actually holding the post, such an

officer should be allowed option under Rule 30 even while under

suspension. The benefit of option will however, practically accrue

to  him  in  respect  of  the  period  of  suspension,  only  after  his

reinstatement,  depending  on  the  fact  whether  the  period  of

suspension is treated as duty or not.

(b)    An officer, who does not retain a lien on a post the pay of which

is changed, is not entitled to exercise the option under Rule 30. If,

however, he is reinstated in the post and the period of suspension

47

CHAP IV ]

PAY

[ RULE 30

is treated as duty, he may be allowed to exercise the option after

such  reinstatement. In such cases, if there is a time-limit prescribed

for exercising the option and such period had already expired

during the period of suspension, a relaxation may be made in

each individual case for extending the period during which the

option may be exercised.

              Government Decision

              The following principles will be followed for fixation of pay when the scale

of pay of a post held on a provisional basis is revised :-

                (i)     If the pay drawn in the previous scale is less than the minimum of the

revised  scale  then  the  pay  in  the  revised  scale  may  be  fixed  at  the

minimum.

                 (ii)     If the pay drawn in the previous scale is a stage in the revised scale the

pay in the revised scale may be fixed at that stage.

                (iii)      If the pay drawn in the previous scale is not a stage, then the pay in the

revised scale may be fixed at the next lower stage, the difference being

treated as personal pay to be absorbed in future increase in pay.

       2.    The above principles will also be adopted for regulating the pay of an

officer holding a post on a provisional basis when appointed to a higher

or a lower post provisionally, except in cases of reversion.

        3.    *Past cases settled otherwise, will not be re-opened.

               Ruling No.1

                 **If an officer earns increment earlier than or after the original date on which

he was supposed to get it at the time of exercise of option under the above

rule due to revision of the date of increment, his pay should automatically be

*[G O(P) No. 297/1966/Fin., Dated  05/07/1966]
**[G O(P) No. 364/1967/Fin., Dated 14/08/1967]

48

CHAP IV ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 30-31

re-fixed with effect from the revised date of increment with reference to the

original option exercised by him under this rule and there will be no need for

exercising a fresh option and issue of special orders for this.

               Ruling No.2

               The pay of an officer when the post  held by him is upgraded will be regulated

as follows :

                 (i)     If the competent authority specifically orders that the appointment of

an officer to the upgraded post involves an enhancement of duties and
higher responsibilities and is therefore a promotion, pay will be fixed

under Rule 28, 28A or 37 (a) of Part I, Kerala Service Rules, as the case

may be.

             †(ii)     In other cases, pay will be fixed under Rule 37 (a), Part I Kerala Service

Rules.

31.       An increment shall ordinarily be drawn as a matter of course unless it is

withheld. An increment may be withheld from an officer by the Government

or by any authority to whom the Government may delegate this power under

Rule 9 if his conduct has not been good or his work has not been satisfactory.

In ordering the withholding of the increment, the withholding authority shall

state the period for which it is withheld and whether the postponement shall

have the effect of postponing future increments.

  Note 1.- An officer shall not be eligible for an increment unless he has acquired

the obligatory departmental test qualifications, if any, prescribed by

Government from time to time to earn the increment.

   Note 2.- A competent authority may order the deferring of the increment of

an officer, pending investigation into his conduct or performance of

work, in disciplinary cases. Such deferring of increment will not be

† [G O(P) No. 522/1981/Fin., Dated 21/08/1981]

49

CHAP IV ]

PAY

[ RULE 31

construed as ‘withholding of increments’ under the Kerala Civil Services

(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1960.

  Note 3.- *An Officer shall  not be eligible to draw his first increment until he

subscribes to State Life Insurance Scheme and Group Insurance Scheme

as specified in Rule 22A and 22B respectively.

              Government Decision No. 1

                An increment shall be granted from the first day of the month in which it

falls due.

                **This decision shall be deemed to have come into force with  effect from 1st

April 1974.

               Government Decision No. 2

                 #Increment accruing consequent on declaration of probation shall be drawn

only with effect from the date of completion of probation but subsequent

increment shall be drawn on the first day of the month in which they fall due.

             This decision shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st

April 1974.

               Ruling

               † In cases where penalties of withholding of increments are imposed on an
officer, one after another, in separate disciplinary cases, the effect of the first

order withholding increment will continue for the period specified in that

order.  There after, the pay will be fixed by granting the increments which

would have been admissible, but for the imposition of penalty and only then

*[Substitution G O(P) No. 78/2010/Fin., Dated 19/02/2010 (with effect from 24/04/2006)]

**[G O(P) No.154/1974/Fin., Dated  08/07/1974]

# [G O(P) No. 133/1975/Fin., Dated 31/03/1975]

†[G O(P) No.329/1984/Fin., Dated  05/07/1984]

50

CHAP IV ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 31-33

will the second order withholding increment be implemented, which will
continue to be in force for the period specified therein, and so on.

32.        Where an efficiency bar is prescribed in a time-scale, the increment next
above the bar shall not be given to an officer without the specific sanction
of the authority empowered to withhold increments.

   Note 1.- On each occasion on which an officer is allowed to pass an efficiency
bar which had previously been enforced against him, he should come
over to the time-scale at such stage as the authority competent to declare
the bar removed, may fix for him, subject to the pay admissible according
to his length of service.

  Note 2.- The cases of all officers held up at an efficiency bar should be
reviewed annually with a view to determine whether the quality of their
work has improved and generally, whether the defects for which they
were stopped at the bar have been remedied, to an extent sufficient to
warrant the removal of the bar.

33.         The following provisions prescribe the conditions on which service counts

for increments in a time-scale :-

                (a)   All duty in a post on a time-scale counts for increments in that time-scale.

             Ruling

                *Periods of service in a post on a time-scale at the same stage of pay only will

count for increment in that time-scale.

               The above ruling will be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st

November 1959.

               (b)    (1)    **Service in another post other than a post carrying less pay
referred  to  in  clause  (a)  of  Rule  21,  whether  in  a  substantive  or

*[G O(P) No.235/1980/Fin., Dated 07/04/1980]
**[G O(P) No. 544/1962/Fin., Dated 08/11/1962  &
      G O(P) No. 81/1964/Fin., Dated 21/02/1964]

51

CHAP IV ]

PAY

[ RULE 33

officiating  capacity,  service  on  deputation  and  leave  except  leave

without allowances taken otherwise than on medical certificate shall

count for increments in the time-scale applicable to the post on which

the officer holds a lien as well as in the time-scale applicable to the post

or posts, if any, on which he would hold a lien had his lien not been

suspended.

               (2)    All leave except leave without allowances taken otherwise than on

medical certificate and service on deputation count for increments

in  the  time-scale  applicable  to  a  post  in  which  an  officer  was
officiating  at  the  time  he  proceeded  on  leave  or  deputation  and

would have continued to officiate but for his proceeding on leave

or deputation:

               †Provided that the leave without allowances under Rule 91 A shall count for

increments subject to the following conditions :-

              1.   The period qualifying for increments shall be restricted to the normal

period required for completion of the course, and

                   2.     Increments shall be granted only on production of the diploma or degree

or completion of the course.

                Provided further that the Government shall have power in any case in which

they are satisfied that the leave without allowances was taken for any cause

beyond the officer’s control, to direct  that  leave  without  allowances  shall

be counted for increments under sub-clause (1) or (2).

                ***Proviso Omitted

               It shall be deemed to have come into force at once.

†[G O(P) No. 204/1976/Fin., Dated 15/07/1976]

***[G O(P) No. 217/2005/Fin., Dated 11/05/2005]

52

CHAP IV ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 33

              *Provided also that leave without allowances taken without  production of

medical certificate in continuation of maternity leave in accordance with the

proviso to Rule 102 will count for increment.

             *This proviso shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 5th

June, 1978.

   Note.-  In  cases  coming  under  sub-clause  (2)  the  appointing  authority

should  certify  that  the  officer  would  have  actually  continued  to

officiate in the post but for his proceeding on leave and the period

of leave will count for increments only to the extent it is covered by

the certificate. Where  no officiating arrangement is made in a leave

vacancy and where the incumbent is likely to return to the same

post after the expiry of the leave the authority sanctioning the leave

may issue such a certificate at the time of grant of leave. In all cases

where the certificates are issued the fact should be recorded in the
Service Book as and when such certificates are issued along with

the leave particulars.

        (c)    If an officer, while officiating in a post or holding a temporary post on a time-

scale of pay, is appointed to officiate in a higher post or to hold a higher

temporary post, his officiating or temporary service in the higher post shall, if

he is re-appointed to the lower post or is appointed or re-appointed to a post

on the same time-scale of pay, count for increments in the time-scale applicable

to such lower post.

           If an officer on reversion from an ex-cadre post to the parent cadre is

appointed to a post on a scale lower than that of the ex-cadre post but
not on the same time-scale as the post held at the time of his transfer to

the  ex-cadre  post,  the  service  rendered  on  the  higher  scale  in  the  ex-

cadre post shall count for increments in the time-scale applicable to the

*[G O(P) No. 145/1986/Fin., Dated 11/02/1986]

53

CHAP IV ]

PAY

[ RULE 33

cadre  post  subject  to  the    same  conditions  as  are  laid  down  for  cases

falling under item (ii) of proviso to Rule 28.

   Exception .- In cases where the appointment is to officiate in a higher post

or to hold a higher temporary post, in the regular line, the officiating

and temporary service in the higher post shall count for increments in

time-scale applicable to the lower post, even if the officer is not re-

appointed to the lower post or is not appointed or re-appointed to a

post on the same time-scale of pay.

               The period of officiating/temporary service in the higher post which counts

for increment in the lower is, however, restricted to the period during which

the officer would have officiated in the lower post but for his appointment to

the higher post. This clause applies also to an officer who is not actually

officiating in the lower post, but who would have so officiated in such lower

post or in  a post on the same time-scale of pay had he not been appointed
to the higher post.

   Note.- *For the purpose of this rule, the officiating and temporary service in

the  higher  posts  will  include  the  period  of  leave  which  counts  for

increments under clause (b).

      (d)    If an officer’s substantive tenure of a temporary post is interrupted by duty

in another post other than a post carrying less pay referred to in clause (a) of

Rule  21  or  by  leave  other  than  leave  without    allowances  or  by  foreign

service, such duty or leave or foreign service counts for increments in the

time-scale  applicable  to  the  temporary  post  if  the  officer  returns  to  the

temporary post:

              Provided that the Government may in any case in which they are satisfied

that the leave was taken on account of illness or for any other cause beyond

*[G O(P) No. 97/1970/Fin., Dated  03/02/1970 & GO(P) No. 56/1972/Fin., Dated  01/03/1972]

54

CHAP IV ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 33

the officer’s control, direct that leave without allowances shall be counted

for increments under this clause.

      (e)    Foreign service counts for increments in the time-scale applicable to—

                 (i)     the post in Government service on which the officer concerned holds a

lien as well as the post or posts, if any, on which he would hold a lien

had his lien not been suspended, and

                 (ii)      any post in which he would have officiated or to which he may receive

officiating promotion under Rule 143 below for the duration of such
promotion.

                (iii)      any post in the parent cadre on a lower scale of pay to which the officer

is appointed on reversion from the ex-cadre post subject to the fulfilment

of the conditions mentioned in item (iii) of proviso to Rule 28.

   Note 1.- *Joining time counts for increments :-

                (i)    If it is under clause (a) of Rule 125, in the time-scale applicable to the

post on which the officer holds a lien or would hold a lien had his lien

not been suspended as well as in the time-scale applicable to the post,

the pay of which is received by the officer during the period, and

               (ii)    If it is under clause (b) of Rule 125, in the time-scale applicable to the

post/posts on which the last day of leave before commencement of the

joining time counts for increments.

  Explanation.- For the purposes of this rule, the period treated as duty under
sub-clause (ii) of clause (7) of Rule 12 shall be deemed to be duty in a

post if the officer draws pay of that post during such period.

   Note 2.- In the case of an officer who, while officiating in a post proceeds on

training or to attend a course of instruction and who is treated as on

*[G O(P) No. 544/1962/Fin., Dated  08/11/1962]

55

CHAP IV ]

PAY

[ RULE 33-34

duty,  while  under  training,  the  period  of  such  duty  will  count  for

increment in the post in which he was officiating prior to his being sent

for training or instruction if he is allowed the pay of the officiating post

during such period.

              Government Decision No. 1

              **A Government servant thrown out of service for want of vacancy and

again reappointed after a break in the same post or in another post carrying

the  same  time-scale  of  pay  can  count  his  prior  service  for    purposes  of

increment under Rule 33 (a) read with Rule 12 (35) (b).

               Government Decision No. 2

               *[Deleted]

             This deletion shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st

October, 1994.

34.            The Government may grant a premature increment to an officer on a time-

scale of pay.

    Note.- In the case of increments granted in advance, it is usually the intention

that the officer should be entitled to increments in the same manner as

if he had reached his position in the scale  in the ordinary course and in

the absence of special orders to the contrary he should be placed on

exactly the same footing, as regards future increments as an officer who

has so risen.

               Government Decision No. 1

In Rule 34 of Kerala Service Rules, Part I, it is laid down that Government

may grant a premature increment to an officer on a time-scale of pay without

**[Circular No. 32532/RAI/61/Fin., Dated 12/01/1962]

*[G O(P) No. 540/1994/Fin., Dated  30/09/1994]

56

CHAP IV ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 34

prejudice to his normal increment. At present there is no ruling or Government

decision as to the circumstances under which the rule regarding the grant of

advance increments could be invoked in individual cases.

        2.   Good service entries and incentive awards are possible variants to advance

increments for the recognition of meritorious service rendered by Government
servants. In G.O.(Ms.) 849/59/PD, dated 24th September 1959, it has been
provided that incentive awards could be made for outstanding performance

of officers in the discharge of their duties and responsibilities. Under this

system, cases of extraordinary originality, imagination or brilliance, or rare
devotion to duty deserving recognition in a special way and suggestions for

reduction of expenditure without affecting efficiency can all be considered

for incentive awards. Government, therefore, consider that the system of

awarding good service entries and incentive awards are eminently suited

for recognising specific or individual cases of meritorious service/work

on  the  part  of  Government  servants;  the  grant  of  advance  increment

being  restricted  to  cases  of  sustained  merit  and  continuous  record  of

good work. In other words, good service entries, incentive awards and

advance  increments  will  be  in  an  ascending  order  in  the  matter  of

recognition of meritorious services of Government servants.

       3.   *Government also wish to emphasise that there should be more or less

uniform  standards  in  recognising  merit  for  the  award  of  advance

increments.  The  confidential  report  of  the  officer  to  whom  advance

increment is proposed to be given should, therefore, be looked into. All

proposals  for  the  grant  of  advance  increments  in  recognition  of  the

meritorious  work  of  Government  servants  shall  be  scrutinised  by  the
concerned Administrative Department, the Public Department and Finance

Department before placing the cases for sanction before the Council of

Ministers.

*[G O(P) No. 283/1975/Fin., Dated 01/07/1975]

57

CHAP IV ]

PAY

[ RULES 34-35

              This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 22nd

February 1974.

         4.    **The above procedure will not apply to the grant of advance increments on
notional basis for purposes of fixation of pay due to considerations other
than of meritorious services of Government servants.

               Government Decision No. 2

                 # Incentive awards in the nature of cash awards for meritorious services

shall not be given to Gazetted Officers.

                The above amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect

from 22nd February 1974.

                Government Decision No . 3

*Advance  increments  for  meritorious  service  may  be  granted  to  both
Gazetted and non-Gazetted Officers.

                Government Decision No. 4

               † Good service entries, incentive awards and advance increments shall not

be granted to officers deputed for training courses.

35.         The authority which orders the transfer of an officer as a penalty from a higher
to a lower grade or post may allow him, to draw any pay, not exceeding the
maximum of the lower grade or post which it may think proper :

                ! Provided that the pay allowed under this rule shall not exceed the pay
which he would have drawn under Rule 28 read with clause (b) or clause
(c) as the case may be, of Rule 33.

**[Circular No. 8/1964/Fin., Dated 23/01/1964]

# [G O(P) No. 283/1975/Fin., Dated 01/07/1975]
*[G O(P) No. 33/1976/Fin., Dated 23/01/1976]
†[G O(P) No. 17/1987/Fin., Dated 06/01/1987]
![G O(P) No. 146/1977/Fin., Dated 16/05/1977]

58

CHAP IV ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 36

36.             If an officer is, on account of misconduct or inefficiency, reduced to a lower grade

or post or to a lower  stage in his time-scale, the authority ordering such reduction

shall state the period for which it shall be effective and whether on restoration,

it shall operate to postpone future increments, and, if so, to what extent.

                Ruling

                   1.     Every order passed by a competent authority imposing on a Government

servant the penalty of reduction to a lower stage in a time-scale should

indicate :-

(i)   The date from which it will take effect and the period (in terms of

years and months) for which the penalty shall be operative.

(ii)   The stage in the time-scale (in terms of rupees) to which the

Government servant is reduced in the following form :

      “The ……………………………………. has decided that Sri

t o   a   p a y   o f
… … … … … … … s h o u l d   b e   r e d u c e d  
`````……………………………… for a period of …………………..
with effect from……   …… ……..” and

(iii)   The extent (in terms of years and months), if any, to which the

period  referred  to  at  (i)  above  should  operate  to  postpone

future increments.

                    It  should  be  noted  that  reduction  to  a  lower  stage  in  a  time-scale  is  not

permissible under the rules either for an unspecified period or as a permanent

measure. Also when a Government servant is reduced to a particular stage,

his pay will remain constant at that stage for the entire period of reduction.
The period to be specified under (iii) should in no case exceed the period

specified under (i).

                    2.   The question as to what should be the pay of a Government servant on

the expiry of the period of reduction should be decided as follows :-

59

CHAP IV ]

PAY

[ RULES 36-37

(i)    If the order of reduction lays down that the period of reduction

shall not operate to postpone future increments, the Government

servant should be allowed the pay which he would have drawn in

the  normal  course  but  for  the  reduction.    If,  however,  the  pay

drawn  by  him  immediately  before  reduction  was  below  the

efficiency bar he should not be allowed to cross the bar except in

accordance with the provision of Rule 32, Part I, Kerala Service

Rules.

 (ii)    *If the orders specifies that the period of reduction was to operate
to postpone future increments for any specified period, the pay of

the Government  servant shall be fixed in accordance with (i) above,

but after treating the period for which the increments were to be

postponed as not counting for increments.

37. (a)   Subject to the provisions of Rule 33 (c) and Rule 39, an officer holding a

permanent or officiating post, if appointed to officiate on a higher time-scale

of pay, will draw as initial pay the stage next above his pay in the lower time-

scale irrespective of whether the pay in the lower time-scale is a stage in the

higher time-scale or not. A refixation will be allowed whenever there is change

of pay in the lower time-scale, i.e., when his pay therein becomes equal to or

greater than the pay which he draws in the higher time-scale.

    †(b)   In the case of officiating appointments from a higher time scale of pay to a
lower time scale of pay, by direct recruitment,  the officer’s officiating pay in

the lower time  scale shall be fixed at the minimum of the scale of pay of the

new post  without considering his pay in the  higher time scale except in the

cases where such appointments are made  in accordance with the Special

Rules applicable  to such appointment  and in the case of such  appointments,

*[G O(P) No. 659/1964/Fin., Dated 14/01/1964. &
    G O(P) No. 262/1966/Fin., Dated 16/06/1966]

†[G O(P) No. 211/2005/Fin., Dated 11/05/2005]

60

CHAP IV ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 37

the Officer’s officiating pay in the new time scale shall be fixed at his officiating
pay in the  previous   appointment, if it is a stage in the new  time scale  or at
the next lower stage, if it is not a stage in the new time scale, the difference
being treated as  personal pay to be absorbed in future increases. But nothing
in this sub rule shall apply to cases of reversions.

              Provided that in cases covered by sub-rules (a) and (b) other than cases of
re-employment after resignation,  removal or dismissal from public service, if
he has previously either held substantively or officiated in (i) the same post,
or (ii) permanent or temporary post on the same time-scale, or (iii) a permanent
post on an identical time-scale or a temporary post (including a post in a
body,  incorporated  or  not,  which  is  wholly  or  substantially  owned  or
controlled by the Government ) on an identical time-scale, then the initial
pay shall not, except in cases of reversion to the parent cadre governed by
item (iii) above, be less than the pay which he drew on the last such occasion
and he shall count the period during which he drew that pay on such last
and any  previous occasions for increment in the stage of the time-scale
equivalent to that pay.  The service rendered in a post referred to in item (iii)
shall, on reversion to the parent cadre, count towards initial fixation of pay
to the extent and subject to the conditions indicated below:

              (a)  the officer should have been approved for appointment to the
particular  grade/post  in  which  the  previous  service  is  to  be
counted;

                (b)    all his seniors, except those regarded as unfit for such appointment, were
serving in posts carrying the scale of pay in which the benefit is to be
allowed or in higher posts, whether in the department itself or elsewhere,
and atleast one junior was holding a post in the department carrying the
scale of pay in which the benefit is to be allowed; and

                  (c)    the service will count from the date his junior is promoted and the  benefit
will be limited to the period the officer would have held the post in his
parent cadre had he not been appointed to the ex-cadre post.

61

CHAP IV ]

PAY

[ RULE 37

               Ruling No. 1

                *When a person in a post (whether within the cadre of his service or not) is

for any reason prevented from officiating in his turn in a post on a higher

scale or grade borne on the cadre of the service to which he belongs, he may

be  authorised  by  special  order  of  the  appropriate  authority  proforma

officiating promotion into such scale or grade  and thereupon be granted the

pay of that scale or grade if that  be more advantageous to him on such

occasion on which the person immediately junior to him in the cadre of his

service (or if that person had been passed over for reasons of inefficiency or
unsuitability or because he is on leave or serving outside the ordinary line or

forgoes officiating promotion of his own volition to that scale or grade, then

the person next junior to him not so passed over) draws officiating salary in

that scale or grade.  But in case, where the person immediately junior to him

happens to assume charge of the post on a later date than that of another
junior, the senior who  is outside the ordinary line shall be eligible for the

benefit of proforma officiating promotion with effect from such date as the

other junior assumes charge of the post:

              Provided that all persons senior to the persons to whom the benefit under

the substantive part of this rule is to be allowed are also drawing, unless

they  have  been  passed  over  for  one  or  other  of  the  reasons  aforesaid,

officiating salary in the said or some higher scale within the cadre :

             Provided further that not more than one person (either the senior most fit

person in a series of adjacent persons outside the ordinary line, or if such a

person either forgoes the benefit on  his own volition or dues not require

benefits  by  virtue  of  his  holding  a  post  outside  the  ordinary  line  which

secures  him  at  least  equivalent  benefits  in  respect  of  salary  and  pension

then the next below the series ) may be authorised to draw the salary of the

*[G O(P) No. 417/1978/Fin., Dated 12/04/1978]

62

CHAP IV ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 37

higher scale or grade in respect of any one officiating vacancy within the
cadre filled by his junior under this rule.

   Note 1.- A fortuitous officiating promotion given to a person who is junior to
one outside the regular line does not in itself give rise to a claim under
the ‘Next Below Rule’.

  Note 2.- *The provisions in item (iii) of the proviso to the above rule in
respect of protection of pay and period of increment shall be applicable
to Government Servants on their appointment directly or on transfer
from a post carrying identical time-scale of pay without fulfilment of
the conditions indicated thereunder subject to the condition that this
benefit will not be admissible to an individual who enters Government
service for the first time from a post in a body incorporated or not
which is wholly or substantially owned or controlled by Government.

              Ruling No. 2

                  1.     †Scope of the term “outside the ordinary line”.-The expression “outside
the ordinary line” occurring in Ruling No.1 is not intended to be rigidly
interpreted  as  necessary    involving  a  post  either  “outside  the  cadre”  or
“outside the ordinary time-scale”.  For instance there are cases of officers
deputed for post-graduate, etc., training and paid training allowances on
the basis of the pay and allowances they would have drawn had they
continued  in  the  Department.    Training  posts  are  also  created  in  the
Department to accommodate them during the period of training.  If an
officer so deputed gets a promotion in the Department it cannot be strictly
stated that the officer is outside the ordinary line, as a training post has
already been created to accommodate him within the cadre.

             2.   Seniority for the purpose of Next Below Rule.-  If Government have
approved in any Department a list of officers in the order of merit for

*[G O(P) No. 393/1963/Fin., Dated  02/07/1963]

†[G O(P) No.610/1964/Fin., Dated 27/08/1964]

63

CHAP IV ]

PAY

[ RULE 37

promotion to administrative rank or a selection grade, then that order

will prevail as the order of seniority for the purpose of the Next Below

Rule, over the order of seniority of the officers in the ordinary gradation

list of their cadre.

                        3.    Promotions  effected  prior  to  the  date  of  the  Next  Below  Rule.-  In

G.O.(P) 393/63/Fin., dated 2nd July 1963 it has been ordered that the

Next  Below  Rule  would  not  apply  to  cases  of  promotions  already

effected.  It has been laid down in the second proviso to the rule that

not more than one person may be authorised to draw the salary of the

higher scale or grade in respect of any one officiating vacancy within

the cadre filled by his junior.  A doubt may arise as to the application of

this proviso in respect of promotions effected before the date of the

rule.  This is made clear by the following illustration.  Suppose eight

persons had been given the benefit of promotion before 2nd July 1963

outside the ordinary line against only 3 promotions within the ordinary

line.    In  this  case,  the  question  of  giving  further  promotion  to  the

persons outside the ordinarily line will arise only after five more persons

are given promotion within the ordinary line so that all the eight persons

outside are sustained.  But those 5 persons who were given promotion

outside the ordinary line before 2nd July 1963 will  continue to get the

benefit even after 2nd July 1963 notwithstanding the second proviso to

the ruling.

               Ruling No. 3

             *In the case of a Government servant officiating in a post and whose pay had

been re-fixed under this rule, if he is confirmed in that post with effect from a

retrospective date, the re-fixation of pay done after the date of confirmation will

have to be revised.  The over payments consequent on such revision will first

*[G O(P) No. 24/1965/Fin., Dated 13/01/1965]

64

CHAP IV ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 37

be set off against arrears, if any, that might become payable to the Government
Servant for a portion of the period from the date of confirmation to the date of
issue of orders of confirmation. The balance of overpayments that cannot be set
off against the arrears, if any, shall be waived.

           This Ruling shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from  1st

November 1959.

              Ruling No. 4

              *The refixation of pay in the higher officiating post on the date of change of
pay in the lower time-scale contemplated in this rule cannot be allowed during
the period of bar on increment with or without cumulative effect. But, in the
cases of bar on increment without cumulative effect, there is no objection to
give the refixation on a notional basis and to give the monetary benefit after
the expiry of the period of bar. Increments accruing in the lower substantive/
officiating post from time to time cannot also be allowed during the period of
bar.

              Ruling No. 5

               **Increments barred with or without cumulative effect in the lower substantive/
officiating post shall not be reckoned for fixation/refixation of pay in the higher
time-scale. But in the case of bar on increment without cumulative effect there is
no objection to grant the barred increments notionally for fixation/refixation of
pay and to give the monetary benefit after the expiry of the period of bar.

               Ruling No. 6

                #A revision of pay as contemplated in Ruling No. 3 shall not be necessary in
the case of retrospective confirmation ordered after the date of retirement of
an officer.

*[G O(P) No. 650/1972/Fin., Dated 12/12/1972]

**[G O(P) No. 150/1977/Fin., Dated 17/05/1977]

#[G O(P) No.79/1975/Fin., Dated 03/03/1975]

65

CHAP IV ]

PAY

[ RULE 37

            The ruling shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st

November 1959.

               Government Decision No. 1

           †The rules governing fixation of pay on transfer from one appointment to
another contained in the service regulations [as modified by G.O. (P) 95/58/

Fin., dated 16th April, 1958 and  G.O. (P) 379/59/Fin., dated 22nd July 1959] are

applicable to all cases of transfers irrespective of whether the transfer is on

the basis of the advice of the Public Service Commission or not. The initial

pay/salary  of  an  officer,  who  while  in  Government  service  but  not  in  a

provisional appointment is recruited by the Public Service Commission for

appointment to a post in the same department or another department will

accordingly  be  fixed  applying  the  above  rules.  No  special  sanction  is

necessary in such cases.

               Government Decision No. 2

              *The above order will take effect from 1st November 1959 the date on which

Kerala Service Rules took effect.

               Government Decision No. 3

             **In the case of re-fixation of pay in the higher officiating appointment in

respect  of  purely  officiating  hands  without  any  substantive  appointment

under Government a certificate should be recorded in the fixation statement/

bill that the government servant concerned would have continued in the

lower  officiating  appointment  had  he  not  been  promoted  to  the  higher

officiating appointment .

†[G O(P) No. 89/1969/Fin., Dated 20/02/1960]

*[G O(P) No. 536/1960/Fin., Dated 09/11/1960]

**[Circular No. RA1/53436/60/Fin. Dated 17/10/1960]

66

CHAP IV ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 37

               Government Decision No. 4

           #An officer officiating in a post, when appointed to a higher post on the
advice of the Public Service Commission or otherwise  is eligible for his
initial pay being fixed under this rule and is also  entitled to the benefit of
refixation contemplated in  the last sentence of the sub-rule (a).

             This order will be deemed to have come into force with effect from 31st

October  1986.

               Government Decision No. 5

                The following principles will be followed for fixation of pay when the scale of

pay of a post held on a provisional  basis is revised :

                 (i)   If the pay drawn in the previous scale is less than the minimum of the
revised scale, then the pay in the revised scale may be fixed at the
minimum.

                  (ii)    If the pay drawn in the previous scale is a stage in the revised scale, the

pay in the revised scale may be fixed at that stage.

                  (iii)    If the pay drawn in the previous scale is not a stage, then the pay in the
revised scale may be fixed at the next lower stage, the difference being
treated as personal pay to be absorbed in future increase in pay.

         2.    The above principles will also be adopted for regulating the pay of an officer
holding a post on a provisional basis when appointed to a higher or a lower
post provisionally, except in cases of reversions.

         3.    *The pay of an officer holding a post on a provisional basis when appointed
provisionally to another post on identical time-scale will be fixed in the new
appointment at a stage equal to the pay he was drawing  in the previous
appointment but the period during which he drew pay at that rate in the
previous appointment will not count for increment.

#[G O(P) No. 475/1990/Fin., Dated  25/09/1990]
*[G O(P) No. 558/1975/Fin., Dated 17/12/1975]

67

CHAP IV ]

PAY

[ RULE 37

        4.    **Past cases settled otherwise, will not be reopened.

               Government Decision No. 6

           # The pay drawn by an officer in an ex-cadre post can be counted for

purpose of initial fixation of pay on promotion in the parent department.

But  the  benefit  of  refixation  of  pay  contemplated  in  the  rule  is  not

admissible  to  him  as  he  loses  connection  with  the  ex-cadre  post  on

appointment to the parent department.

               *The benefit of pay drawn in an ex-cadre post for purpose of initial fixation
will not be admissible, if an officer is reverted to the parent department, to a

post carrying a scale of pay lower than that of the ex-cadre post.

               Government Decision No. 7

            The re-fixation of  pay contemplated in the last sentence of sub-rule (a) is

admissible even in cases where the change of pay in the lower time-scale is

due to fixation of pay on account of revision of the scale of pay. If both the

lower and  higher time-scales are revised, the benefit will be restricted to

cases of options exercised in respect of both the posts simultaneously.

               Government Decision No. 8

              † The principles enunciated in paragraph (1) of  the Government Decision
No. 5 above will be adopted for regulating the pay of an officer holding a

post on a provisional basis when appointed to a higher or a lower post on a

regular basis also, except in cases of reversions.

                Effective from 5th July 1966.

**[G O(P) No. 297/1966/Fin., Dated 05/07/1966]

#[G O(P) No. 580/1970/Fin., Dated  13/08/1970]

*[G O(P) No. 223/1977/Fin., Dated 14/07/1977]

†[G O(P) No. 811/1971/Fin., Dated 21/12/1971]

68

CHAP IV ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 37

                Government Decision No. 9

                     (i)    The pay of an officer holding a post on a provisional basis and appointed

on regular basis to another post on identical time-scale will be fixed  at a

stage equal to the pay he was drawing in the provisional appointment.

The period during which the officer has drawn pay at that rate on the

provisional appointment will not count for increment.

                (ii)   The pay drawn by an officer in a post held by him on a provisional

basis  on  initial  appointment  to  Government  service  through  the

employment  exchange  or  otherwise  will  not  be  reckoned  for

regulating his pay on appointment to another post carrying lower

time-scale on a regular basis. Cases of persons appointed to a post

on a provisional basis while holding regular posts and subsequently

appointed to another post carrying a lower time-scale on a regular

basis  except  cases  of  reversions,  and  cases  of  provisional  hands

appointed  to  higher  posts  on  a  regular  basis  will  continue  to  be

regulated by the Government Decision No. 8.

           *Government Decision No. 8 will stand modified to the above extent. This
decision will take effect from 5th July 1966. Cases already settled otherwise
will not be reopened to the disadvantage of the persons concerned.

               Government Decision No. 10

            **The pay of a provisional appointee/promotee when re-appointed/re-

promoted provisionally to the same post shall be fixed at the same stage

at which he was drawing pay on the last such occasion and the period

during which he drew pay at that stage on such last and any previous

occasions will count for increment.

*[G O(P) No. 137/1973/Fin., Dated  09/05/1973]

**[G O(P) No.50/1977/Fin., Dated 04/02/1977]

69

CHAP IV ]

PAY

[ RULE 37-37A

                Government Decision No. 11

               #The pay of an officer holding a post on a regular basis and appointed on a
provisional basis to another post on identical time-scale will be fixed  at a
stage equal to the pay he was drawing in the regular appointment. The period
during which the officer has drawn pay at that rate on the regular appointment
will count for increment in the provisional appointment.

                The above decision shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 3rd

May 1963.

37 A.      Notwithstanding  the  provisions  contained  in  these  rules,  the  pay  of  a
Government servant whose promotion or appointment to a post is found to
be or to have been erroneous, shall be regulated in accordance with any
general or special orders issued by the Government in this behalf.

              Government Decision

              The following provisions shall govern the pay and increments of a Government
servant whose promotion or appointment in a substantive or officiating capacity
to a post is later found to be erroneous on the basis of  facts :-

                     1.   The orders of promotion or appointment of a Government servant should
be  cancelled  as  soon  as  it  is  brought  to  the  notice  of  the  appointing
authority that such a promotion or appointment has resulted from a factual
error and the Government servant concerned should, immediately on such
cancellation,  be brought to the position which he would have held but for
the incorrect order of promotion or appointment.

                   2.   Service rendered by the Government servant concerned in the post he
was wrongly promoted/appointed as a result of the error should not be
reckoned for the purpose of increments or for any other purpose in that
grade/post  to  which  he  would  not  normally  be  entitled  but  for  the
erroneous promotion/ appointment.

# [G O(P) No. 218/1980/Fin., Dated 24/03/1980]

70

CHAP IV ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 37A

                    3.    Any consequential promotions/appointments of other Government
servants made on the basis of the incorrect promotion/appointment
of a particular Government servant will also be regarded as erroneous
and such cases also will be regulated on the lines indicated in the
preceding paragraph.

                      4.    Except when the appointing authority is the Government, the question
whether the promotion/appointment of a particular Government servant
to a post was erroneous or not should be decided by an authority next
higher than the appointing authority in accordance with the established
principles  governing  promotions/appointments.  In  cases  of  doubt
Government may be consulted.

                   5.   Cases of erroneous promotion/appointment should be viewed with
serious concern and suitable disciplinary action taken against the
officers  and  staff  responsible  for  such  erroneous  promotion/
appointment under the Kerala Civil Services (Classification, Control
and Appeal) Rules, 1960.

                      6.    In  the  case  of  a  Government  servant  who  has  been  erroneously
promoted/appointed  to  a  post  in  a  substantive  capacity,  the
following  procedure  may  be  followed  for  deconfirming  the
Government servant in that post and only thereafter, the Government
servant concerned should be brought down to the position which
he would have held but for the erroneous promotion/appointment.

(a)       An order of confirmation which is clearly contrary to the relevant
statutory  rules  may  be  cancelled  by  the  competent  authority
straight away. Here the order of confirmation was ab initio void
as it was ultra vires of the relevant rules and cancellation of the
order would be justified on the ground that there was no valid
subsisting  order  at  all  and  the  act  of  cancellation  is  a  mere
formality. The effect of cancellation would be to put the employee
concerned in a position of never having been confirmed.

71

CHAP IV ]

PAY

[ RULE 37A-37B

(b)      An order of confirmation which is contrary to executive orders or

administrative instructions may be cancelled by the competent

authority, if such erroneous order of confirmation has operated

to the prejudice of some identifiable person who would otherwise

have been confirmed, if the orders had been correctly applied.

                Here the order of cancellation would be just and equitable as the confirmation

of the employee concerned operates unfairly to the detriment of another employee

who would have otherwise been confirmed. Such cancellation will not have the

effect of doing any injustice to the employee whose confirmation is cancelled,
since he was under the executive orders or  administrative instructions in force,

not entitled to confirmation.

                It would, however, be in consonance with the principles of natural justice that a

notice to show cause why the orders of confirmation should not be cancelled be

given to the affected party in both the types of cases specified above.

                7.   *The orders re-fixing the pay in all the above cases should be issued

expressly under Rule 37A, Part I, Kerala Service Rules.

37. B (a) Probationer in any service shall draw initial pay as follows :-

             (i)   while undergoing a course of instruction or training  the pay, if any,

specified in the ‘Special Rules’ in that behalf or by special orders of

Government, and

               (ii)    after completion of the course of instruction or training and when there
is no course of instruction or training, the minimum of the time-scale of

the probation post.

         (b)     (i)     A probationer whose, period of probation is two years and whose increment is

annual shall be entitled to draw the first increment in the time-scale of the

*[Memorandum No. 87/63, Dated 30/11/1963]

72

CHAP IV ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 37B

probation post after putting in the service required to earn an increment.

The second increment shall be drawn only with effect from the date from

which he is declared to have completed his probation.  Delay in completing

probation will not however, affect his future increments and these will

accrue on the normal incremental dates.

                 (ii)    In the case of a probationer whose period of probation is one year and

whose increment is annual, the first increment in the scale of pay of the

probation post shall be drawn only with effect from the date on which

he is declared to have completed his probation. Delay in completing

probation will not, however, affect his future increments and these will

accrue on the normal incremental dates.

  Note.- *If any period of the service of a probationer does not count for

probation, he shall complete the period of probation of one year or

two year’s duty, as the case may be, by being on duty for an equal

period from the date of expiry of one year or two years as the case

may be after the commencement of the probation. In cases where

the above period is expressed in terms of months and days, then

such period shall be calculated as provided in Rule 12 (21) of Part I,

Kerala Service Rules. In cases where the absence is expressed in

days, the date of completion of probation shall be extended by the

number of days of such absence.

             Effective from 4th April 1983.

        (c)   ** Subject to the provisions of Rule 39 and notwithstanding the provisions

of sub-rules (a) and (b) of this rule, an officer shall be entitled to draw in the

probation post the pay for which he would be eligible from time to time under

the provisions of Rule 28A, Rule 33 (c) or Rule 37, as the case may be.

*[G O(P) No. 163/1983/Fin., Dated 04/04/1983]

**[G O(P) No. 153/1964/Fin., Dated  08/04/1964]

73

CHAP IV ]

PAY

[ RULES 38-41

38.         When an officer officiates in a post, the pay of which has been fixed at a rate
personal to another officer the Government may permit him to draw pay at
any rate not exceeding the rate so fixed or, if the rate so fixed be a time-scale,
may grant him initial pay not exceeding that lowest stage of that time-scale
and future increments not exceeding those of the sanctioned scale.

39.        The Government may in individual cases fix by special order the pay of an
officiating officer at an amount less than that admissible under these rules.

40.           The  Government  may  issue  general  or  special  orders  allowing  acting
promotions to be made in place of officers who are treated as on duty
under Rule 12 (7) (iii).

  Note.- Acting arrangements may be allowed by competent authority if the
period of training of an officer is one month or more. If it is less than a
month, no arrangements can be made except under the special sanction
of Government.

               Government Decision

                * In the case of deputation of a Government Servant for training or a course
of instruction which is treated as duty under Rule 12 (7) (iii), Part I, Kerala
Service  Rules  it  is  not  necessary  to  create  a  new  post  in  order  to
accommodate him during such training or course of instruction, since the
very order sanctioning the deputation for training would be a sanction in
this behalf.

                Effective from 2nd September 1964.

41.           Personal Pay.- Except when otherwise ordered by Government personal
pay shall be reduced by any amount by which the recipient’s pay may be
increased and shall cease as soon as his pay is increased by an amount

equal to his personal pay.

*[G O(P)  No. 632/1964/Fin., Dated  02/09/1964]

74

CHAP IV ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 42-43

42.          Pay of  Temporary Posts.- When a temporary post is created which may

have to be filled by a person not already in Government Service, the pay

of the post shall be fixed with reference  to the minimum that is necessary

to secure the services of a person capable of discharging efficiently the

duties of the post.

43.         When a temporary post is created which will probably be filled by a person

who is already in the service of Government its pay should be fixed with due

regard to-

                (a)    the character and responsibility of the work to be performed, and

            (b)   the existing pay of officers of a status sufficient to warrant their

selection for the post.

  Note.- Temporary posts by this criterion should be considered as temporary

additions to the cadre of a service should be created in the time-scale
of the service ordinarily without extra remuneration. Incumbents of

these posts will therefore draw their ordinary time-scale of pay. If the

posts  involve  decided  increases  in  work  and  responsibility  in

comparison with the duties of  the parent cadre generally it may be

necessary to sanction a special pay in addition.

75

CHAP V ]

ADDITION OF PAY

[ RULE 44

CHAPTER  V

ADDITIONS TO PAY

44.         Compensatory Allowances.- Subject to the general rule that the amount of
compensatory allowances should be so regulated that the allowance is not
on the whole a source of profit to the recipient the Government may grant
such  allowances  to  any  officer  under  its  control  and  may  make  rules
prescribing  their  amounts  and  the  conditions  under  which  they  may  be
drawn. (For rules made under the above Rule See  Appendix IV).

         I.   Unless otherwise ordered by Government, a compensatory allowance shall
ordinarily be drawn only by a Government servant actually on duty, but the
authority competent to sanction leave may in writing permit it to be drawn by
the officer on earned leave, if the whole or a considerable part of the expense
to meet which the allowance was granted continues to be incurred by him
during the leave:

                Provided the Government Servant certifies that he continued for the period
for which the allowance is claimed, to incur the whole or a considerable part
of the expense for which the allowance was granted:

               Provided further that the officer is due to return after leave to the same post or
station, as the case may be from which he proceeded on leave or to a similar post
or station for which the allowance at the same or a higher rate is admissible:

               Provided further when the Government servant on return from leave is posted
to a post other than the one from which he went on leave and both the posts
carry similar allowances but at different  rates, the Government servant shall
during leave draw the lesser of the two rates.

              I.   (A) *Subject to the second and third provisions to clause I above,
compensatory allowance granted under class VI (c) in Appendix IV
may be drawn during periods of earned leave:

*[G O(P) No. 302/1966/Fin., Dated 07/07/1966]

76

CHAP V ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 44

                       This clause shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from

12th January 1965.

                II.    A compensatory allowance granted under class IV, Appendix IV may be

drawn during temporary transfer, if-

   (i)      the authority sanctioning the transfer certifies that the Government

servant is likely, on the expiry of the temporary duty, to return to

the station from which he is transferred ;

 (ii)    the Government servant draws no allowance of the same kind

in the post to which he is transferred;

and

(iii)    the Government servant certifies that he kept his family, for the

period for which the allowance is claimed, at the station from

which he proceeded on transfer.

                   III.   A compensatory allowance granted under class VI,  Appendix IV may

be drawn during temporary transfer, if-

   (i)     the authority sanctioning the transfer, certifies that the Government

servant is likely on the expiry of the transfer, to return to the post

to which the allowance is attached or to another post carrying a

similar allowance; and

 (ii)     the Government servant certifies that he continued for the period

for  which  the  allowance  is  claimed  to  incur  the  whole  or  a

considerable part of the expenditure for which the allowance was

granted.

  Note.-The certificate under clause (ii) above will be dispensed with when it

is inapplicable.

77

CHAP V ]

ADDITION OF PAY

[ RULES 44-45

                IV.    **If a Government servant in his old post drew compensatory allowance
granted under Class IV, or Class VI of Appendix IV (but not in an individual
capacity)  and  is  transferred  to  another  post,  he  may  be  allowed  the
compensatory allowance during joining time as applicable to the old station
from which he was transferred.  He may also be allowed house rent allowance
during transit as applicable to the old station from which he was transferred.
He shall not be allowed conveyance allowance or Permanent Travelling
Allowance.

               Government Decision No. 1

           *Notwithstanding anything contained in the second and third provisos to
Rule 44 (I), Part I Kerala Service Rules, House Rent Allowance and City
Compensatory Allowance admissible from time to time will be payable during
the  periods  of  leave  with  allowances,  including  leave  preparatory  to
retirement, if the total period of such leave at a time does not exceed 180 days
or if the actual duration  of the leave exceeds 180 days, for the first 180 days
of such leave.

               *This shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 25th July, 1995.

            Government Decision No.2

  †[Deleted]

45.         The Government may make rules or issue orders laying down the principles
governing the allotment to officers, for use by them as residences, of such
buildings owned or leased by it, or such portions thereof, as the Government
may make available for the purpose.  Such rules or orders may lay down
different principles for observance in different localities or in respect of
different classes of residence, and may prescribe the circumstances in which
such an officer shall be considered to be in occupation of a residence.

**[G O(P) No.1010/1987/Fin., Dated  27/11/1987]

*[Substitution G O(P) No.135/2002/Fin., Dated 14/03/2002]
†[G O(P) No. 378/1991/Fin., Dated 01/06/1991]

78

CHAP V ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 46-47

46.          Fees.-   The Government may permit an officer, if it be satisfied that this can

be done without detriment to his official duties or responsibilities, to perform

a specified service or series of services for a private person or body or for a

public  body  including  a  body  administering  a  local  fund  or  for  another

Government and to receive as remuneration therefore, if the service be material

a non recurring or recurring fee.

    Note.-    This  rule  does  not  apply  to  the  acceptance  of  fees  from  private

persons by medical officers in Government employ for professional

attendance which is regulated by separate orders of Government.

47.        No officer may undertake work for another Government, or a private or

public  body  or  a  private  person,  or  accept  fee  therefore,  without  the

sanction of the Government.

  Note.-  Heads of department, while forwarding their recommendations in

such cases shall unless the officer is on leave, specifically state whether

the work can be undertaken  by the officer concerned without detriment

to his official duties and responsibilities.

               Government Decision

            *In respect of examinations conducted by the Education Department, the

Public Service Commission, the University  etc.,  it is not necessary to accord

individual  sanction  for  acceptance  of  remuneration  in  every  case  of

Government servant undertaking such work.  Any officer of Government,

who is called upon to undertake work in connection with the examination,

conducted by the following examining bodies, will be permitted to accept
such  assignment  and  the  remuneration  therefore  with  effect  from  1st
November 1959:-

*[G O(P) No. 193/1960/Fin., Dated 12/04/1960, G O(Ms) No. 45/1961/Fin., Dated 03/02/1961  &
G O(P) No. 386/1971/Fin., Dated 05/07/1971]

79

CHAP V ]

ADDITION OF PAY

[ RULES 47-48

              1.   The Kerala University and other Universities.

                2.   The Union Public Service  Commission, the Public Service Commission of

the States and the Secretarial Training School, Cabinet Secretariat of the

Government of India.

              3.   The London Chamber of Commerce.

              4.   The Departments of this Government.

                5.   The Forest Research Institute and Colleges, Dehra Dun and Coimbatore.

          6.  †The Kerala State Co-operative Union in respect of Co-operative Subordinate

Personnel Training Examination.

                    The item No.6 shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 10th

May 1966.

48.          *Unless the Government by special order otherwise direct, one-third of any
non-recurring  fee  exceeding  #  `````  2000  or  one-third  of  any  recurring  fee
exceeding # ````` 1250 a year, paid to an officer, shall be credited to the General
Revenues.

   Note 1.-  If any fee to which this rule applies exceeds # ````` 2000 non-recurring
or  #  `````  1250  a  year  recurring  one-third  of  the  total  amount  payable
should be credited to the General Revenues, provided that the amount

retained by the officer concerned will not, merely owing to the operation
of this rule, be reduced below # ````` 2000, if non-recurring or  # `````1250 a
year if recurring.

               Non-recurring and recurring fees should be dealt with separately and should

not  be  added  for  the  purpose  of  crediting  one-third  to  General  Revenues

†[G O(P) No. 296/1966/Fin.,  Dated 04/07/1966]

*[G O(P) No. 389/1965/Fin., Dated 11/10/1965]

# [G O(P) No. 1248/1997/Fin., Dated 10/12/1997]

80

CHAP V ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

 [ RULES 48-49

under this rule.  In the case of the former,  the limit of # ````` 2000 prescribed in
this rule should be applied in each individual case, and in the case of the latter
the limit of # ````` 1250 should be applied with reference to the total recurring
fees for the financial year.

              #This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 26th

July 1995.

  Note 2.-The above rule does not apply to fees received by officers from a

University  or  other  examining  body  in  return  for  their  services  as

examiners or from the revenues of another Government in return for

their services to that Government* and also to the royalties received

by officers from the publishers for the sale of the books written by

them even with the aid of knowledge acquired during the course of

their service.

             *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 11th

October 1971.

49.           Honoraria.- The Government may grant or permit an officer to receive an

honorarium as remuneration for work performed which is occasional in

character and either so laborious or of such special merit as to justify a

special reward. Except when special reasons, which should be recorded

in writing exist, for a departure from this provision, sanction to the grant or

acceptance of an honorarium should not be given unless the work has been

undertaken with the prior consent of the Government and its amount has

been settled in advance.

               Government Decision No. 1

              † The following allowances will be classified as honoraria under this rule :

# [G O(P) No. 1248/1997/Fin., Dated 10/12/1997]

†[G O(P) No. 576/1963/Fin., Dated 07/11/1963]

81

CHAP V ]

ADDITION OF PAY

[ RULES 49-50

                1.   Overtime allowance.

               2.    Allowance given to Wardens and Assistant Wardens of hostels.

               Government Decision No. 2

             **When State Government Officers required to attend the meetings of the

Interview Board of the Kerala Public Service Commission are not eligible for

Travelling Allowance  under  the  rules,  they  shall  be  paid  an  honorarium

equivalent to the daily allowance admissible under Rule 39, Part II, Kerala

Service Rules.

                 Effective from 22nd January 1969.

               Government Decision No. 3

            The conditions of prior consent and the settlement of the amount in advance

referred to in the last sentence of this rule will not apply to any work ordered to

be done at Government level.

               Government Decision No.  4

                  When  members  of  the  Boards  for  various  examinations  conducted  by  the

Commissioner for Government Examinations required to attend to the meetings

of the Boards are not entitled to Travelling Allowance and Daily Allowance

under  the  rules,  they  shall  be  paid  an  honorarium  equivalent  to  the  Daily

Allowance admissible under Rule 39, Part II, Kerala Service Rules.

            This decision will be deemed to have come into force with effect from 17th

January 1972.

50.            Fees and Honoraria.- In the case of both fees and honoraria the sanctioning
authority shall record in writing that due regard has been paid to the general

principle enunciated in Rule 14 and shall record also the reasons which

in his opinion justify the grant of the extra remuneration.

**[G O(P) No. 155/1970/Fin., Dated 07/03/1970]

82

CHAP V ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 51-52

51.          Any officer is eligible to receive without special permission-

            (a)   the premium awarded for an essay or plan in public competition;

           (b)   any reward offered for the arrest of a criminal or for information or

special service in connection with the administration of justice;

         (c)   any reward payable in accordance with the provisions of any Act or

Regulation or Rules framed thereunder;

               (d)     any reward sanctioned for services in connection with the administration

of the customs and excise laws;

               (e)   any fees payable to an officer for the duties which he is required to

perform in his official capacity under any special law or by order of

Government; and

                  (f)    any  remuneration  paid  by  the  All  India  Radio  for  professional

performances in its programmes,  such as music, drama and the like.

   Note.-Sanction of the authorities mentioned below is, however, necessary

for accepting remuneration for giving talks over the All India Radio by

Government Officers:

Name  of  Officers  giving  the  talk        Name o f  authority  whose  permission
                                                                                           is required

              Chief Secretary and Secretaries

              Heads of department

Officers subordinate to Heads of
Departments

Minister concerned

Secretaries concerned

Heads of Departments

52.        An officer whose duties involve the carrying out of scientific or technical

research shall not apply for or obtain, or cause or permit any other person to

apply for or obtain, a patent for an invention made by such officer save with

the permission of the Government and in accordance with such conditions

as the Government may impose.

83

CHAP VI ]

COMBINATION OF APPOINTMENTS

      [ RULE 53

CHAPTER  VI

COMBINATION OF APPOINTMENTS

53. (a)   A competent authority may appoint an officer to hold substantively or to

officiate in two or more  independent posts at one time.

       (b)   †The competent authority who appoints an officer to hold or to officiate in
a second post in addition to his own, will declare whether he officiates in or

holds full charge of the additional post or is appointed merely to discharge

the current duties. It should also specify in each case the amount  of **special
allowance, if any, to be  granted, the amount being subject to the following

limits :-

            (1)   If an officer is appointed to officiate in a second post and to hold in

addition full charge of his own post, he may be allowed to draw the

highest pay to which he would be entitled if his appointment to one of

the posts stood alone **and in addition special allowance which should

not exceed * 6 per cent of the minimum of the scale of pay of other post
with effect from the 1st day of  February, 2011 or the date of change over
to the revised scale ordered in G.O.(P) No.85/2011/Fin. dated the 26th
February, 2011, which ever is later.The highest pay referred to above

may be specifically reduced by the competent authority at its discretion.

                        If  compensatory allowance is attached to one of the posts, he may be

permitted to draw it in full and if compensatory allowances are attached

to more than one of the posts, the allowance which may be granted to

him should not exceed the larger allowance.

             (2)    If the officer is appointed to hold full charge of one or more posts in

addition to his own, the **special allowance which may be granted to

†[G O(P) No. 342/1965/Fin., Dated 31/08/1965]
**[G O(P) No. 635/2002/Fin., Dated 19/10/2002]
*[Substitution G O(P) No. 467/2012/Fin., Dated 21/08/2012 (with effect from 01/02/2011)]

84

CHAP VI ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 53

him in respect of each additional post should not exceed *6 per cent of
the minimum of the scale of that post with effect from the 1st day of
February, 2011 or the date of change over to the revised scale ordered
in G.O.(P). No.85/2011/Fin. dated the 26th February, 2011, which ever is
later.The drawal of compensatory allowances will be regulated as in

the sub-para under clause (1) above.

              (3)     If  the officer is appointed to discharge only the current duties of one or

more posts in addition to his own, the **special allowance which may be

granted to him in respect of each additional post should not exceed *3 per
cent of the minimum of the scale of pay of that post with effect from the 1st
day of February, 2011 or the date of change over to the revised scale
ordered in G.O(P) No. 85/2011/Fin dated the 26th February, 2011, which ever
is  later,  in  addition  to  the  pay  and  compensatory  allowances,  if  any,

admissible in his regular post.

        (c)    No **special allowance should be granted unless the previous incumbent of

the additional post held, has actually given over charge thereof under orders

of competent authority and unless the period of additional charge exceeds

fourteen working days in the case of full additional charge and one month in
the  case  of  discharge  of  current  duties  only.  †The  drawal  of  **special
allowance should not be allowed for a period exceeding three months on any

account.

                    †This shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 9th March

1998.

              ** This shall be deemed to have come into force on 1st March, 1997.

*[Substitution G O(P) No. 467/2012/Fin., Dated 21/08/2012 (with effect from 01/02/2011)]

**[G O(P) No. 635/2002/Fin., Dated 19/10/2002]

† [G O(P) No. 225/2002/Fin., Dated 15/04/2002]

85

CHAP VI ]

COMBINATION OF APPOINTMENTS

[ RULE 53

        (d)   [Deleted].

        (e)   Additional remuneration should not be allowed as a matter of course or

granted  when  the  extra  duties  to  be  performed  are  only  nominal  or

comparatively light. Additional remuneration should not be allowed during

any period of vacation unless the additional duty is actually performed

during such period.

               Ruling

                 The term ‘independent’ occurring in the above rule should be interpreted
as  meaning  separate  or  distinct  involving  independent  duties  and

responsibilities and the post subordinate to the one held by the officer

should not be taken as independent under the rule.

               Government Decision No. 1

          *At present charge allowance of the non gazetted officer for his holding

additional charge of a gazetted post is being authorised by the office of the

Accountant General based on the sanction of competent authorities, in the

same way as pay and allowances of a gazetted officer is concerned. This

practice has since been reviewed in the light of the procedure followed in

some of the Audit and Account offices of other States. It has been decided

that no authorisation from the office of the Accountant General is necessary
in case of additional charge arrangements from 1st April 1963 onwards, as
holding of additional charge of a gazetted post does not alter the status of a

non gazetted officer to that of a gazetted officer.

              According to the changed procedure, the additional charge allowance will

be drawn and paid by the Head of Office in the same manner as his regular

pay and allowances are drawn. The Drawing Officer should however satisfy

himself  that  there  is  proper  sanction  of  the  competent  authority  for  the

*[G O(P) No. 312/1963/Fin., Dated 29/05/1963]

86

CHAP VI ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 53-53A

additional charge arrangements and that the officer has actually held the

additional charge of the post during the period for which the charge allowance

is drawn and also that the rate of allowance sanctioned and drawn is as per

rules etc. The charge allowance thus drawn may be continued to be debited

to the same head of account to which the pay of the non-gazetted officer is

debited.

            In the case of a non gazetted officer holding additional charge of the

duties  of  the  Head  of  an  Office,  who  is  a  gazetted  officer  and  also  a

drawing and disbursing officer, the procedure adopted for the drawal of
his normal pay and allowances may be followed for the drawal  of charge

allowance also.

               Government Decision No. 2

                  †The following criteria will be followed to distinguish between ‘full additional

charge’ and ‘discharge of current duties’:-

           (i)   An officer appointed to hold ‘full additional charge’ of a post has to
perform all the administrative, financial and statutory functions and

duties in respect of that post.

                (ii)    An officer appointed to discharge current duties of a post need attend

only to the work of a routine nature in respect of that post.

53A.    **The posts in respect of which additional charge arrangements may be

ordered shall be as classified below:-

       (I)   Posts not  in the same office, establishment or line of promotion or cadre.-

Where the duties and responsibilities are clearly independent and are eligible
for *special allowance, e.g., Labour Commissioner, holding charge of the

†[G O(P) No. 319/1972/Fin., Dated  31/07/1972]

**[G O(P) No. 132/1987/Fin., Dated  10/02/1987]

*[G O(P) No. 635/2002/Fin., Dated  19/10/2002]

87

CHAP VI ]

COMBINATION OF APPOINTMENTS

[ RULE 53A

post of Registrar of Co-operative Societies and Joint Secretary to Government

holding charge of post of a Head of Department.

               This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force on 1st March,

1997.

      (II)      Posts  in  the  same  office,  establishment  or  line  of  promotion  or  cadre.-

Cases of this nature shall further be divided as follows :-

               (a)    When the additional post is subordinate to the regular post, *special

allowance shall not be admissible e.g., Superintendent of Police holding
charge of the post of Assistant Superintendent of Police or Deputy

Superintendent of Police and District Collector holding the charge of

the post of Revenue Divisional Officer under him.

  Note.- The reason for the non-grant of *special allowance  In the above

cases is that the superior officer is expected to supervise the work of

the subordinates and the additional charge arrangements should not

entitle him to extra remuneration.  The work of the additional post

should be redistributed among other subordinates in such a way that

each one’s load of work is increased to a small extent that no one need

be given *special allowance.

                 (b)    When the additional post is of equivalent and of the same rank as that

of the regular post the following principles shall apply:

(1)       If additional charge arrangements are in respect of different territorial

jurisdictions, the posts are definitely independent and in such cases

*special allowance shall be admissible, e.g., Revenue Divisional

Officer of one district/division holding charge of another district/

division  and  one  Block  Development  Officer  holding  charge  of

another block.

*[G O(P) No. 635/2002/Fin., Dated  19/10/2002]

88

CHAP VI ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 53A

 (2)    If additional charge arrangements are in respect of  posts in the

same office and of the same rank, *special allowance shall not be

admissible if the duties of the additional post are identical in nature

and  if  the  responsibilities  are  such  as  can  easily  be  spread  out

among others holding the same post, e.g., if a Deputy Collector

goes on leave and if the Collector has a number of Deputy Collectors

working under him, he should consider whether he can distribute

the responsibilities of the Deputy Collector on leave to the other

Deputy Collectors so as not to increase substantially each one’s
load of work.

        This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force on 1st

March, 1997

  (3)    If the additional charge arrangements are in the same office and

if  the  responsibilities  attached  to  the  post  are  indivisible  and

cannot be distributed to more than one officer, special allowance*

shall be admissible.  In such cases, a certificate to the effect that

the responsibilities of the post held in additional charge are not

divisible, should be furnished by the competent authority, {**}

e.g. Deputy Director of Animal Husbandry (Key Village) or Deputy

Director of Animal Husbandry (Veterinary) or Deputy Director of

Animal Husbandry (Extension) holding charge of the other post.

       This shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 13th October,

1995.

      (c)   When the additional post is superior to the regular post and is carrying higher
scale of pay *special allowance shall be admissible, e.g., Deputy Secretary or

Joint Secretary  to Government holding charge of the post of Additional Secretary

*[G O(P) No. 635/2002/Fin., Dated  19/10/2002]

**[Omitted G O(P) No. 242/2002/Fin., Dated 22/04/2002]

89

CHAP VI ]

COMBINATION OF APPOINTMENTS

[ RULE 53A

or  Secretary to Government and a Superintendent of Police or Assistant Inspector

General of Police holding charge of the post of Deputy Inspector General of

Police.

              This shall be deemed to have come into force on 1st day of March, 1997

             (d)   ** All India Service Officers, State Government Officers and Judicial

Officers who are in the scale of pay of Secretary to Government and

above shall not be eligible for charge allowance for holding additional

charge of other posts.

  !Note.- Clause (d) shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from
13th  October,  1995  in  respect  of All  India  Service  Officers  and  7th
November, 2002 in respect of others.

**[Substitution G O(P) No. 218/2005/Fin., Dated 11/05/2005]

! [Insertion G O(P) No. 76/2007/Fin., Dated 27/02/2007]

90

CHAP VII ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 54-55

CHAPTER  VII

DISMISSAL, REMOVAL AND SUSPENSION

54.          The pay and allowances of an officer who is dismissed or removed from

service cease from the date of such dismissal or removal.

55.            #An  officer  under  suspension  or  deemed  to  have  been  placed  under

suspension  by  an  order  of  the  appointing  authority  is  entitled  to  the

following payments:-

               ** [Deleted] Subsistence allowance at an amount equal to *the leave salary

which the officer would have drawn had he been on leave on half-pay on the

date of suspension; but the benefit of any increase in pay due to increment

falling due during the period of suspension will not be admissible during the

period.

                This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st

April 1973.

               † [Deleted]

                ** † This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. from 6th

March, 1997.

           In  addition,  he  may  be  granted  to  such  extent  and  subject  to  such

conditions as the authority ordering his suspension may direct-

              (i)   Dearness allowance and Dearness pay not exceeding the amount

admissible as such had he been on leave on leave salary equal to

the rate of subsistence allowance payable from time to time.

# [G O(P) No.573/1978/Fin., Dated 14/07/1978]

* [G O(P) No.158/1977/Fin., Dated 24/05/1977]

[G O(P) No.547/1978/Fin., Dated 26/06/1978]

**† [G O(P) No.133/02/Fin., Dated 14/03/2002]

91

CHAP VII ]

DISSMISSAL, REMOVAL AND SUSPENSION

[ RULE 55

               (ii)     Any other compensatory allowance of which he was in receipt on the

date  of  suspension.

   Note 1.- If an officer under suspension is dismissed with retrospective effect

no recovery is necessary of the subsistence grant already paid to him.

  Note 2.-(a)  Deductions shall be made from the subsistence allowance on

account of the following :-

                 (i)     Income Tax and Super Tax (provided the employees annual income

calculated with reference to subsistence allowance is taxable).

               (ii)      House rent and allied charges i.e., electricity, water, furniture etc.

                (iii)     Repayment of loans and advances, taken from Government at such

rates as the Head of the Department deems appropriate.

               (iv)     *Amounts due to Co-operative Stores and Co-operative Credit Societies.

               (v)      **Subscription to the Family Benefit Scheme, if the officer is a subscriber

to the scheme.

          (vi)    #Subscription to the Group Insurance Scheme, if the officer is a

subscriber to the scheme.

                         # This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 6th July,

2002

              (b)   Deduction on account of the following shall be optional: -

                (i)     Premia due on Postal Life Insurance Policies and State Life Insurance

Policies-Official Branch.

               (ii)     Refund of advances taken from General Provident Fund.

*[G O(P) No. 141/1972/Fin., Dated 12/05/1972]

**[G O(P) No. 83/1980/Fin., Dated 23/01/1980]

#[Addition G O(P) No. 56/2006/Fin., Dated 03/02/2006]

92

CHAP VII ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 55

                         The written consent of the officer should be obtained in the case of these

optional deductions.

            C.   Deductions of the following nature should not be made from the subsistence

allowance:-

    (i)     Subscription to a General Provident Fund.

   (ii)     Amount due to Court attachments.

  (iii)      Recovery of loss to Government for which an officer is responsible.

       (d)   As regards recovery of overpayments, there is no bar to effect the same

from the  subsistence allowance, but such recoveries of overpayments

should  not  ordinarily  be  made  at  a  rate  greater  than  one-third  of  the

amount of the subsistence allowance i.e., exclusive of dearness allowance

if any, admissible to him.

  Note 3.- No payment under the rules shall be made unless the officer furnishes

a certificate that he is not engaged in any other employment, business,

profession  or  vocation.  In  the  case  of  non-gazetted  officers,  the

certificate signed by the officer should be countersigned by a gazetted

officer, in token of acceptance. It should then be attached to  the bill in

which subsistence allowance for the period covered by the  certificate

is claimed. In the case of gazetted officers payment of subsistence

allowance will be authorised by the Accountant General on the basis

of the sanction issued by the competent authority and the Treasury

Officer will pay the allowance only if a similar countersigned certificate

is attached to the bill claiming it.

  Note 3A.-*Compensatory allowance under clause (ii) above may be granted

provided the officer certifies that for the period for which the allowance

is claimed, he continued to incur the whole or a considerable part of

*[G O(P) No. 320/1968/Fin., Dated 26/06/1968]

93

CHAP VII ]

DISSMISSAL, REMOVAL AND SUSPENSION [ RULE 55-55B

the expense to meet which the allowance was granted.  The maximum
period for which the compensatory allowance may be paid shall be
limited to *180 days.

  *  This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 25th July,

1995.

  Note 4.- In the case of an officer under suspension before 27th July 1962
recovery of House Construction Advance shall be limited to 1/3 of the
subsistence allowance or the usual rate of monthly instalment whichever
is lower. No penal interest shall be levied on the defaulted portion of
the instalment.

  This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from

25th July, 1995.

55A.      **[Deleted]

                This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 3rd

February 1988.

55B. (i)  #Notwithstanding any thing contained in Rule 55, when an officer is placed
under suspension while on leave without allowances, he shall not be eligible
for any subsistence allowance during the period of the leave.  On the expiry
of the leave if he continues to be on suspension,  he shall be entitled to the
subsistence allowance.  If he is reinstated before the expiry of the leave, he
shall continue to be on leave till its expiry, unless the officer other wise
desires.

        (ii)   In the case of an Officer on leave with allowances, the orders of suspension
shall have the effect of cancelling the leave for the period of suspension.  He
shall be entitled to subsistence allowance.

*[G O(P) No. 58/2006/Fin., Dated 04/02/2006]
**[G O(P) No. 549/1988/Fin., Dated 31/08/1988]
# [G O(P) No. 907/1997/Fin., Dated  24/10/1997]

94

CHAP VII ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 56

56. (1)   When an officer who has been dismissed, removed or compulsorily retired
including an officer who has been compulsorily retired under Rule 60A, is
reinstated as a result of appeal or review or would have been so reinstated,
but for his retirement on superannuation while under suspension or not, the
authority competent to order reinstatement shall consider and make a specific
order-

             (a)    regarding the pay and allowances to be paid to the officer for the
period of his absence from duty including the period of suspension
preceding his dismissal, removal, or compulsory retirement, as the
case may be,

           (b)    whether or not the said period shall be treated as a period spent on duty,

and

              (c)    in the case of an officer who was compulsorily retired under Rule
60A and subsequently reinstated, for the recovery of the relevant
benefits, if any, already paid to him.

      (2)   Where the authority competent to order reinstatement is of opinion that
the officer who had been dismissed, removed or compulsorily retired,
has been fully exonerated, the officer shall, subject to the provisions of
sub-rule (6) be paid the full pay and allowances to which he would have
been entitled had he not been dismissed, removed or compulsorily retired
or suspended prior to such dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement
as the case may be:

          Provided that where such authority is of opinion that the termination of the
proceedings instituted against the officer had been delayed for reasons directly
attributable to the officer, it may, after giving him an opportunity to make his
representation and after considering the representation,  if any, submitted by
him, direct, for reasons to be recorded in writing, that the officer shall subject to
the provisions of sub-rule (7), be paid for the period of such delay, only such
amount (not being the whole) of such pay and allowances as it may determine.

95

CHAP VII ]

DISSMISSAL, REMOVAL AND SUSPENSION

[ RULE 56

         (3)   In a case falling under sub-rule (2), the period of absence from duty including
the  period  of  suspension  preceding  dismissal,  removal  or  compulsory
retirement as the case may be, shall be treated as a period spent on duty for
all purposes.

        (4)    In cases other than those covered by sub-rule (2) including cases where the
order of dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement from service is set aside
by  the  appellate  or  reviewing  authority  solely  on  the  ground  of  non-
compliance with the requirements of clause (2) of Article 311 of the Constitution
and no further enquiry is proposed to be held, the officer shall, subject to the
provisions  of    sub-rules  (6)  and  (7)  be  paid  such  amount  (not  being  the
whole) of the pay and allowances to which he would have been entitled, had
he not been dismissed, removed or compulsorily retired or suspended prior
to such dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement as the case may be, as
the competent authority may determine, after giving notice to the officer of
the  quantum  proposed  and  after  considering  the  representation,  if  any,
submitted by him in that connection within such period as may be specified
in the notice:

            Provided that except in the case of such officers as are governed by the
provisions of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (Central Act 4 of 1936), any
payment under this sub-rule shall be restricted to a period of three years
immediately preceding reinstatement or retirement on superannuation, as
the case may be.

         (5)    In a case falling under sub-rule (4), the period of absence from duty including
the period of suspension preceding his dismissal, removal or compulsory
retirement, as the case may be, shall not be treated as a period spent on duty,
unless the competent authority specifically directs that it shall be so treated
for any specified purpose:

                Provided that if the officer so desires such authority may direct that the

period of absence from duty including the period of suspension preceding

96

CHAP VII ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 56

his  dismissal,  removal  or  compulsory  retirement,  as  the  case  may  be,

shall  be  converted  into  leave  of  any  kind  due  and  admissible  to  the

officer.

   Note 1.- The order of the competent authority under the  preceding proviso

shall be absolute and no higher sanction shall be necessary for the

grant of -

  (a)   Leave without allowances in excess of three months in the case of

a temporary officer; and

  (b)    Leave of any kind in excess of  five  years in the case of a permanent

officer.

  *Note 2.-The leave of any kind due and admissible referred to in the proviso

shall include commuted leave also.

    (6)  The payment of allowances under sub-rule (2) or sub-rule (4) shall be

subject  to  all  other  conditions  under  which  such  allowances  are

admissible.

       (7)    The amount (not being the whole) of such pay and allowances determined

under the provision to sub-rule (2) or under sub-rule (4) shall not be less

than the subsistence allowance and other allowances admissible under

Rule 55.

       (8)    Any payment made under this rule to an officer on his reinstatement shall be

subject  to  adjustment  of  the  amount,  if  any,  earned  by  him  through  an

employment during the period between the date of removal, dismissal or

compulsory retirement, as the case may be, and the date of reinstatement.
Where the emoluments admissible under this rule are equal to or less than the

amounts earned during the employment elsewhere, nothing shall be paid to

the officer.

*[G O(P) No. 839/1992/Fin., Dated 04/11/1992]

97

CHAP VII ]

DISSMISSAL, REMOVAL AND SUSPENSION

[ RULE 56A

56A.(1)  Where the dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement of an officer is

set aside by a Court of Law and such officer is reinstated without holding

any further inquiry the period of absence from duty shall be regularised

and the officer shall be paid pay and allowances in accordance with the

provisions of sub-rule (2) or sub-rule (3) subject to the directions, if any,

of the court.

      (2)  Where the dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement of an officer is set

aside  by  the  court  solely  on  the  ground  of  non-compliance  with  the

requirements of clause (2) of Article 311 of the Constitution, and where he is

not exonerated on merits, the pay and allowances to be paid to the officer for

the period intervening between the date of dismissal, removal or compulsory

retirement  including  the  period  of  suspension  preceding  such  dismissal,

removal  or  compulsory  retirement,  as  the  case  may  be,  and  the  date  of

reinstatement shall be determined by the competent authority and the said

period shall be regularised, in accordance with the provisions contained in

sub-rule (4), (5) and (7) of Rule 56.

        (3)   If the dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement of an officer is set

aside by the court on the merits of the case, the period intervening

between  the  date  of  dismissal,  removal  or  compulsory  retirement

including the period of suspension preceding such dismissal, removal

or  compulsory  retirement,  as  the  case  may  be,  and  the  date  of

reinstatement shall be treated as duty for all purposes and he shall

be paid the full pay and allowances for the period, in which he would

have  been  entitled,  had  he  not  been  dismissed,  removed  or

compulsorily retired or suspended prior to such dismissal, removal
or compulsory retirement, as the case may be.

     (4)  The payment of allowances under sub-rule (2) or sub-rule (3) shall be

subject  to  all  other  conditions  under  which  such  allowances  are

admissible.

98

CHAP VII ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 56A-56B

        (5)    Any payment made under this rule to an officer on his reinstatement shall be

subject  to  adjustment  of  the  amount,  if  any,  earned  by  him  through  an

employment during the period between the date of dismissal, removal or

compulsory retirement and the date of reinstatement. Where the emoluments

admissible under this rule are equal to or less than those earned during the

employment elsewhere, nothing shall be paid to the officer.

56B.(1)   When an officer who has been suspended is reinstated or would have

been so reinstated but for his retirement on superannuation while under

suspension,  or  has  retired  from  service  on  superannuation  before  the

conclusion  of  the  disciplinary  proceedings  against  him  the  authority

competent to order reinstatement shall consider and make a specific order.

             (a)   regarding the pay and allowances to be paid to the officer for the

period of suspension ending with reinstatement or the date of his

retirement on superannuation, as the case may be; and

                 (b)   whether or not the said period shall be treated as a period spent on

duty.

        (2)    Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  Rule  55,  where  an  officer  under

suspension  dies  before  the  disciplinary,  or  court  proceedings  instituted

against him are concluded, the period between the date of suspension and

the date of death shall be treated as duty for all purposes and his family shall

be paid the full pay and allowances for that period to which he would have

been entitled had he not been suspended, subject to adjustment in respect of

subsistence allowance already paid.

        (3)   Where the authority competent to order reinstatement is of the opinion that

the  suspension  was  wholly  unjustified,  the  officer  shall,  subject  to  the

provisions of sub-rule (8) be paid the full pay and allowances to which he

would have been entitled, had he not been suspended:

99

CHAP VII ]

DISSMISSAL, REMOVAL AND SUSPENSION

[ RULE 56B

                Provided that where such authority is of the opinion that the termination of

the proceedings instituted against the officer had been delayed owing to

reasons  directly  attributable  to  the  officer,  it  may  after  giving  him  an

opportunity  to  make  his  representation  and  after  considering  the

representation, if any, submitted by him, direct, for reasons to be recorded in

writing, that the officer shall be paid for the period of such delay only such

amount (not being the whole) of such pay and allowances as it may determine.

       (4)    In a case falling under sub-rule (3), the period of suspension shall be treated

as a period spent on duty for all purposes.

       (5)    In cases other than those falling under sub-rules (2) and (3), the officer shall

subject to the provisions of sub-rules (8) and (9) be paid such amount (not

being the whole) of the pay and allowances to which he would have been

entitled had he not been suspended, as the competent authority may determine,

after giving notice to the officer of the quantum proposed and after considering

the representation, if any, submitted by him in connection within such period

as may be specified in the notice.

       (6)   Where suspension is revoked pending finalisation of the disciplinary or

court  proceedings,  any  order  passed  under  sub-rule  (1)  before  the

conclusion of the proceedings against the officer shall be reviewed on

its own motion after the conclusion of the proceedings by the  authority

mentioned  in  sub-rule  (1)  who  shall  make  an  order  according  to  the

provisions of sub-rule (3) or sub-rule ( 5), as the case may be.

     (7)   In a case falling under sub-rule (5), the period of suspension shall not be

treated as a period spent on duty unless the competent authority specifically
directs that it shall be so treated for any specified purpose:

               Provided that if the officer so desires, such authority may order that the

period of suspension shall be converted into leave of any kind due and

admissible to the officer.

100

CHAP VII ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 56B

  Note 1.-The order of the competent authority under the preceding proviso

shall be absolute and no higher sanction shall be necessary for the

grant of-

    (a)   leave without allowances in excess of three months in the case of a

temporary officer, and

    (b)   leave of any kind in excess of  five years in the case of  a permanent

officer.

   Note 2.-*The leave of any kind due and admissible referred to in the proviso

shall include commuted leave also.

     (8)   The payment of allowances under sub-rule (2), sub-rule (3) or sub-rule (5)

shall be subject to all other conditions under which such allowances are

admissible.

        (9)     **The amount (not being the whole) of such pay and allowances determined
under the proviso to sub-rule (3) or under sub-rule (5) shall not be less than

the subsistence allowance and other allowances admissible under Rule 55.

   Note  1.-  The  amount  of  subsistence  allowance  already  drawn  should  be

adjusted against the pay and allowances or proportion of them granted

under Rules 56, 56A or 56B or leave salary which may be granted to the

officer.

  Note 2.- The orders of revocation of suspension or of  reinstatement after

dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement from service take effect

from the date of the order and the intervening period, i.e., the period

from the date of order to the date of joining duty shall be regularised

by granting joining time and/or leave due and admissible to the officer

concerned. However, cases where there is an abnormal time-lag between

*[G O(P) No. 839/1992/Fin., Dated  04/11/1992]

**[G O(P) No. 573/1978/Fin., Dated 14/07/1978]

101

CHAP VII ]

DISSMISSAL, REMOVAL AND SUSPENSION

[ RULE 56B

the date of such order and the date on which the  officer concerned

reports for duty shall be decided by Government, on merits.

    Note  3.-  †When  a  period  of  suspension  is  ordered  to  be  converted  into
leave,  the  amount  of  subsistence  allowance  and  compensatory

allowances already received in excess of the leave salary and allowances

admissible on such conversion, shall be refunded. *However, no refund

of  subsistence  allowance  shall  be  necessary,  where  the  suspension

ordered on or after 24th August, 2007, is converted into leave without

allowances for want of sufficient number of leave with allowances to

the credit of the Officer concerned.

                          Effective from 10th July 1981.

  Note 3A.- **If the officer is a subscriber to the Family Benefit Scheme who

has received the payment due under the scheme and desires to avail

himself of the benefit of the scheme, he shall refund the entire amount

received. In addition, he shall also make the contribution for the period

of service from the date of dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement

to the date of reinstatement, in case the period is ordered to be counted

as  duty  for  all  purposes    including  pay  and  allowances.  In  cases

however where the period is ordered to be treated  as eligible leave,

the subscriber need make his contribution only for period of eligible

leave for which he is entitled to get full or half pay.

  Note 4.- A permanent post vacated by the dismissal, removal, compulsory

retirement or reduction of a Government servant to a lower service,

grade or post or to a lower time-scale should not be filled substantively

†[G O(P) No. 442/1981/Fin., Dated 10/07/1981]

*[Insertion G O(P) No. 633/2010/Fin., Dated 25/11/2010 (with effect from 24/08/2007)]

** [G O(P) No. 83/1980/Fin., Dated 23/01/1980]

102

CHAP VII ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 56B

until the expiry of the period of one year from the date of such dismissal,

removal, compulsory retirement or reduction, as the case may be.  Where

on the expiry of the period of one year, the permanent post is filled and

the original incumbent of the post is reinstated thereafter, he should be

accommodated against any post which may be substantively vacant

in the grade to which his previous substantive post, belonged.  If there

is  no  such  vacant  post,  he  should  be  accommodated  against  a

supernumerary post which should  be created in this grade with proper

sanction and with the stipulation that it would be terminated on the

occurrence of the first substantive vacancy in that grade.

    Note  5.-  If  an  officer  under  suspension  is  dismissed  *or  removed  with

retrospective effect from the date of suspension, no recovery should

be made of the subsistence allowance already paid to him, and arrears

of subsistence allowance, if any, due to him upto the date of the order

dismissing *or removing him should be paid to him. The arrears of

subsistence allowance due to the officer should not be adjusted against

any amounts due from him to Government.

    Note  6.-  If  an  officer  under  suspension  is  compulsorily  retired  with

retrospective effect from the date of suspension, the pension due to

the officer from the date of such retirement to the date of the order

compulsorily retiring him shall be with held if the rate of pension is

lower than or equal to the rate of subsistence allowance granted to

him.  In case the pension happens to be higher than the subsistence

allowance granted the difference shall be paid to the officer.  (Note 6

shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 22nd August

1960).

* [G O(P) No. 46/1980/Fin., Dated 15/01/1980]

103

CHAP VII ] DISSMISSAL, REMOVAL AND SUSPENSION [ RULES 56B-57

               Government Decision

             *The term ‘Pension’ used in Note 6 does not include death-cum-retirement

gratuity.

                Effective from 22nd August 1960.

               Ruling No. 1

                **Notwithstanding the provision contained in clause (4), an officer who

is  reinstated  under  clause  (1)  and  who  would  have  been  eligible  for

promotion to a higher post during the period of suspension but for the

suspension will be entitled to the pay and allowances of the higher post

only from the date on which he assumes charge of that post.

               Ruling No. 2

           # It is not necessary to create an additional post to draw the pay and
allowances of an officer who has been placed under suspension and is

reinstated in service, treating the period of absence as duty.

57.          †An officer who is detained in custody, whether on a criminal charge, or

otherwise,  for  a  period  exceeding  forty-eight  hours,  or  is  undergoing

imprisonment, shall be deemed to be under suspension with effect from

the date of commencement of the detention or imprisonment, as the case

may be, and shall not be allowed to draw any pay and allowances during

such  period  of  suspension  other  than  any  subsistence  allowance  and

other allowances that may be granted in accordance with Rule 55, until

he is reinstated in service.  An adjustment of his pay and allowances for

such periods should thereafter be made according to the circumstances

*[G O(P) No. 73/1966/Fin., Dated 01/03/1966]

** [G O(P) No. 593/1963/Fin., Dated 21/11/1963]

# [G O(P) No. 273/1973/Fin., Dated 11/07/1973]
†[G O(P) No. 266/1967/Fin., Dated  06/07/1967]

104

CHAP VII ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 57-59

of the case, the full amount being given only in the event of the officer

being acquitted of blame or (if the proceedings taken against him were

for his arrest for debt) of its being provided that the officer’s liability

arose from circumstances beyond his control.

58.           *An officer against whom a criminal charge or a proceeding for arrest for debt

is pending in a court of law should also be placed under suspension by the

issue of specific orders to this effect during periods when he is  not actually

detained in custody or imprisoned (e.g., whilst released on bail) if the charge

made or proceeding taken against him is connected with his position as an

officer or is likely to embarrass him in the discharge of his duties as such or

involves moral turpitude unless there are exceptional reasons for not adopting

this course.  In regard to his pay and allowances the provisions of the rule

above shall apply.

59.         Leave may not be granted to an officer under suspension.

* [G O(P) No. 266/1967/Fin., Dated 06/07/1967]

105

CHAP VIII ]

COMPULSORY RETIREMENT

[ RULE 60

CHAPTER    VIII

COMPULSORY  RETIREMENT

60.  (a)    #Except as otherwise provided in these rules the date of compulsory retirement
of an officer shall take effect from the afternoon of the last day of the month
in which he attains the age of 56 years.  He may be retained after this date
only with the sanction of the Government on public grounds which must be
recorded in writing, but he must not be retained after the age of 60 years
except in very special circumstances.

 **(a a)    An Officer in the Kerala Judicial Service or the Kerala State Higher Judicial
Service shall ordinarily retire when he attains the age of 60 years; but he
shall  have  the  option  to  retire  when  he  attains  the  age  of  58  years.    His
continuance in service beyond the age of 58 years shall however be subject
to review by the High Court as per the provisions of the Kerala Judicial
Service Rules and the Kerala State Higher Judicial Service Rules.

              This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with  effect from

31st December , 1992.

     (a b)   *A person appointed as Industrial Tribunal shall retire  on superannuation at

the age of 60 years.

               This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 1st  July,

1995.

  †(ac)    A person appointed as Vigilance Tribunal under the Kerala Civil Services
(Vigilance Tribunal) Rules, 1960 shall retire on superannuation at the age
of 60 years.

              *This shall be deemed to have come into force on the 9th day of March, 2005.

#[Substitution G O(P) No. 183/2012/Fin., Dated 26/03/2012 (with effect from 26/03/2012)]
**[G O(P) No. 457/1995/Fin., Dated  28/07/1995]
*[Insertion G O(P) No. 213/2005/Fin., Dated 11/05/2005]
†[Insertion G O(P) No.77/2008/Fin., Dated 11/02/2008 (with effect from 09/03/2005)]

106

CHAP VIII ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 60

# (ad)   Doctors in the Medical category under the Medical Education Service and
the  Dental  Colleges  and  Dental  Wings  in  the  Medical  Colleges  and  the

teaching  staff,  including  Principals  of  the  Ayurveda  Colleges  and

Homoeopathic Medical Colleges shall retire on the afternoon of the last day

of the month in which they attain the age of 60 years:

           Provided that this provision shall not be applicable to the faculties in

Nursing,  Pharmacy  and  non-medical  category  under  the  Medical

Education Service.

          This sub-rule shall be deemed to have come into force in the case of the

Doctors in the medical category under the Medical Education Service on the
1st day of May, 2009, in the case of the Doctors working in the Dental Colleges
and the Dental Wings in the Medical Colleges, on the 30th day of March,
2012, in the case of the teaching staff of the Ayurveda Colleges on the 7th
day of April, 2012 and in the case of the teaching staff of the Homoeopathic
Medical Colleges on the 9th day of April, 2012.

   (ae)  The categories of teaching staff including Principals mentioned in the

sub-rule(ad) who complete the age of 60 years during the course of an

academic year shall continue in service till the last day of the month in

which the academic year ends; but the extended period of service shall

not be reckoned for any service benefits such as increment, higher grade,

accrual of leave, promotion and pay revision effective from a date after

the date of superannuation under sub-rule(ad). The period shall not be

counted as qualifying service for pension and the pay received during

the period shall not be reckoned for computing average emoluments or

pensionary benefits or commuted value of pension. If they are on leave

on the day they attain the age of 60 years and fail to rejoin duty on the

first  working  day  immediately  after  the  date  of  superannuation,  they

# [Insertion G O(P) No.01/2013/Fin., Dated  01/01/2013 (with effect from 01/01/2013)]

107

CHAP VIII ]

COMPULSORY RETIREMENT

[ RULE 60

shall be retired with effect from the date of superannuation under sub-
rule (ad). But, in cases where officers coming under this rule are under
suspension on the date of superannuation or thereafter, but before the
closing day of the academic year, they shall be retired from service on
the  date  of  supernnuation  or  on  the  date  of  suspension,  whichever  is
later.

                   If, the day on which the categories of teaching staff including Principals
mentioned in the sub-rule (ad) attain the age 60 years falls within the period
of one month beginning with the day of reopening of the institutions, they
shall cease to be on duty with effect from the date of such reopening and
they shall be granted additional leave from the date of reopening to the last
day of the month in which they attain the age of 60 years. They shall be
entitled to the benefit of increment if it falls due before the actual date on
which they attain the age of 60 years.

           The additional leave granted under this sub-rule shall not be counted
against the eligible leave but shall be counted for pension. During the
period of leave they may draw leave allowance at the same rate as the
pay and allowances they would have drawn if they were on duty;

   Note 1.- Even in cases where it is found absolutely necessary to retain
the service of a teaching staff specified in sub-rule (ad), who has
attained the age of 60 years, as far as possible only re-employment
after retirement shall be resorted to, which shall not ordinarily be
sanctioned for more than one year at a time.

   Note 2.- Completion of 60 years of age in service shall be in the afternoon and
not in the forenoon. If the date of birth of a person is the first day of July,
he completes his 60th year on the 30th day of June, and that date (30th
June) is the last day of the month in which he completes the 60th
year. If on the first day of July he is on his 61st year and that day is
a non-working day for him, he shall cease to be in service on and
from the 1st day of July.

108

CHAP VIII ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 60

   Note 3.- A teaching staff specified in sub-rule (ad) whose date of birth is

the first day of July and who attains the age of 60 years shall not be

allowed to continue in service till the end of the academic year.

    *(af)   The date of compulsory retirement of an officer appointed on or after the 1st
day of April, 2013 and who is a member of National Pension System shall

take effect from the afternoon of the last day of the month in which he attains

the age of 60 years. He may be retained after this date only with the sanction

of the Government on public grounds which must be recorded in writing, but

he  must  not  be  retained  after  the  age  of  64  years  except  in  very  special
circumstances.

                The teaching staff of all educational institutions (including Principals of

Colleges) who complete the age of 60 years during the course of an academic

year  shall  continue  in  service  till  the  last  day  of  the  month  in  which  the

academic year ends, but the extended period of service shall not be reckoned

for any service benefits such as increment, higher grade, accrual of leave,

promotion  and  pay  revision  effective  from  a  date  after  the  date  of

superannuation. If they are on leave on the day they attain the age of 60 years

and fail to rejoin duty on the first working day immediately after the date of

superannution, they shall be retired with effect from the date of superannution.

But, in cases where officers coming under this rule are under suspension on

the date of superannuation or thereafter,  but before the closing day of the

academic  year,  they  shall  be  retired  from  service  on  the  date  of

superannuation or on the date of suspension, whichever is later.

           If, however, the day on which teaching staff, (including Principals of

Colleges) attain the age of 60 years falls within the period of one month

beginning with the day of reopening of the institutions, they shall cease

to be on duty with effect from the date of such, reopening and they shall

be granted additional leave from the date of reopening to the last day of

* [Inserted G O(P) No. 469/2014/Fin., Dated 31/10/2014 (with effect from 01/04/2013)]

109

CHAP VIII ]

COMPULSORY RETIREMENT

[ RULE 60

the month in which they attain the age of 60 years. They shall be entitled

to the benefit of increment if it falls due before the actual date on which

they attain the age of 60 years.

              If they are eligible to continue in service till the close of the academic year
under  the  2nd  paragraph  of  this  sub-rule,  they  shall  be  granted  additional
leave from the date of closing for vacation till the last day of the month, when

the date of closing is earlier than the last day of the month.

                  The additional leave granted under this sub-rule will not be counted against
the eligible leave. During the period of leave they will draw leave allowance at

the same rate as the pay and allowances they would have drawn if they were

on duty.

   Explanation :- For the purpose of this sub-rules, ‘the teaching staff’ means

those employees included in the Explanation to sub-rule (c).

  Note 1.- Even in cases where it is found absolutely necessary to retain the

service  of  an  officer  who  has  attained  the  age  of  60  years  as  far  as

possible only re-employment after retirement shall be resorted to which

shall not ordinarily be sanctioned for more than one year at a time.

   Note 2.- Completion of 60 years of age in service shall be in the afternoon

and not in the forenoon. A person whose date of birth is first day of
July completes his 60th years on 30th day of June, and that date (30th
June) is the last day of the  month in which he completes the 60th year.

          If on first day of July he is on his 61st year and that day is a non-
working day for him. He shall cease to be in service on and from the
1st day of July.

Note 3.- A teaching staff whose date of birth is first day of July and who attains

the age of 60 years shall not be allowed to continue in service till the

end of the academic year.

110

CHAP VIII ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 60

   Note 4.- In cases where the academic year in respect of the institutions under
the Director of Public Instrucion is extended beyond the 31st of March
in any year, the teaching staff of such institutions who are allowed to

continue in service beyond the date of superannuation under the second

para of sub-rule (af) shall retire on the last day of March itself.

        (b)    †Officers in the Last Grade Service on 7th April 1970 will retire on the afternoon
of  the last day of the month in which they attain the age of 60 years provided

that this benefit will be available to them only as long as they continue to be

in the Last Grade Service as defined in Rule 12 (16-A).

   # Note 1.- Ex-servicemen who were in armed force prior to 7th April, 1970 and
who have been appointed as Last Grade Employees in the Last Grade
Service in the State after 7th April 1970 will also be eligible for the
benefit  of  the  above  rule  provided  they  continue  to  be  in  the  Last

Grade Service.

   **Note 2.-The patient employees appointed as Hospital attendant Grade II

in the Leprosy Hospitals under Health Services Department will also

be eligible for the benefit of the above rule irrespective of the date of

appointment.

         This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f.23rd

August, 1984.

     (c)   ! The teaching staff of all Educational Institutions (including Principals of

Colleges) who complete the age of 56 years during the course of an academic

year  shall  continue  in  service  till  the  last  day  of  the  month  in  which  the

academic year ends; but the extended period of service shall not be reckoned

† [G O(P) No. 344/1975/Fin., Dated 31/07/1975]
# [G O(P) No.535/1990/Fin., Dated  25/10/1990]
**[Insertion G O(P) No. 159/2002/Fin., Dated 22/03/2002]

! [Substitution G O(P) No.183/2012/Fin., Dated 26/03/2012 (with effect from 26/03/2012)]

111

CHAP VIII ]

COMPULSORY RETIREMENT

[ RULE 60

for any service benefits such as increment, higher grade, accrual of leave,

promotion  and  pay  revision  effective  from  a  date  after  the  date  of

superannuation under sub-rule (a) of rule 60.  The period shall not be counted

as qualifying service for pension and the pay received during the period shall

not be reckoned for computing average emoluments or pensionary benefits

or commuted value of pension.  If they are on leave on the day they attain the

age of 56 years and fail to rejoin duty on the first working day immediately

after the date of superannuation, they shall be retired with effect from the

date of superannuation under sub-rule (a) of rule 60.  But, in cases where
officers  coming  under  this  rule  are  under  suspension  on  the  date  of

superannuation or thereafter, but before the closing day of the academic year,

they shall be retired from service on the date of superannuation or on the date

of suspension, whichever is later.

                If, however, the day on which the teaching staff (including Principals of

Colleges) attain the age of 56 years falls within the period of one month

beginning with the day of reopening of the institutions, they shall cease

to be on duty with effect from the date of such reopening and they shall

be granted additional leave from the date of reopening to the last day of

the month in which they attain the age of 56 years.  They shall be entitled

to the benefit of increment if it falls due before the actual date on which

they attain the age of 56 years.

              If they are eligible to continue in service till the close of the academic year
under  the  1st  paragraph  of  this  sub-rule,  they  shall  be  granted  additional
leave from the date of closing for vacation till the last day of the month when

the date of closing is earlier than the last day of the month.

              The additional leave granted under this sub-rule will not be counted against

the eligible leave and will count for pension.  During the period of leave they

will draw leave allowance at the same rate as the pay and allowances they

would have drawn if they were on duty.

112

CHAP VIII ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 60

   Explanation.- For the purpose of this sub-rule, ‘teaching staff’ includes-

     (1)     Assistant Educational Officers, including Deputy Inspectors of Malabar

area.

   (2)   District Educational Officers and officers belonging to the cadre, but

working in other assignment.

    (3)    The following officers of the State Institute of Education, namely :-

            (a)   Junior Evaluation Officer,

           (b)  Special Assistant in English,

           (c)   Technical Assistant,

            (d)   Text Books Research Officer,

            (e)   Education Techniques Officer,

             (f)   Junior Science Consultant,

            (g)   Instructors in Science, and

            (h)   Staff drafted from the teaching staff of Education Department,

provided the continuance of this staff in service till the closing

day of schools is absolutely essential in the interest of work

and  that  they  are  entitled  to  this  benefit  in  their  parent

Department.

              † Items (1) and (2) above shall be deemed to have come into force with
effect from 9th August 1968 and item No (3) shall be deemed to have
come into force with effect from 8th May 1969.

    (4)  *(a)  Director of Collegiate Education.

                    Effective from 9th June 1971.

† [G O(P) No.344/1970/Fin., Dated 22/05/1970]

*[G O(P) No.622/1971/Fin., Dated 12/10/1971]

113

CHAP VIII ]

COMPULSORY RETIREMENT

[ RULE 60

  (b)   Additional Director of Collegiate Education.

  (c)    Deputy Director of Collegiate Education.

        **Note  1.-  The  extended  period  of  service  under  sub-rule  (c)  shall  be
reckoned for all service benefits such as increment, pension, higher
grade, accrual of leave, promotion and pay revision.

    ^ Note 2.- † Item (b) shall be deemed to have been added with effect from
the 26th November 1980 and item (c) shall be deemed to have been
added with effect from 21st August 1974.

  (d)   Assistant Director of Collegiate Education.

  (e)   Special Officer (University Grants Commission Schemes)

      # Note 3.-The items (d) and (e) shall be deemed to have come into force

with effect from the 8th July 1981.

       !(5)    Special Officer for Direct Payment in the Department of Collegiate  Education.

              This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 11th

December 1972.

      ~(6)   The following Officers appointed from the teaching department of the Medical

College Service, namely :-

   (a)   Director of Medical Education, and

   (b)   Joint Director of Medical Education

   This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with  effect from

29th August, 1984.

[ **Insertion, ^ Substitution G O(P) No. 261/2009/Fin., Dated 04/07/2009
(with effect from 24/04/2009)]
† [G O(P) No. 264/1981/Fin., Dated  02/05/1981]
# [G O(P) No.122/1982/Fin., Dated 18/03/1982]
! [G O(P) No. 248/1973/Fin., Dated 22/06/1973]
~[G O(P) No.961/1986/Fin., Dated 30/12/1986]

114

CHAP VIII ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 60

      (7)   *The following officers appointed from the Teaching  Staff of  the Technical

Education Department:-

    (a)   Director of Technical Education.

    (b)   Joint Director of Technical Education.

    (c)   Professor (Direct payment).

    (d)  Deputy Director of Technical Education.

    (e)   Joint Controller of Technical Examinations.

    (f)   Training Officers.

    (g)   Technical Officer.

    (h)   Stock Verification Officer.

    (i)    Assistant Director of Technical Education.

    (j)    Special  Officers  appointed  for  starting  of  Technical  Educational

Institutions.

  (k)  Director,  Kerala  State  Science  and    Technology  Museum,

Thiruvananthapuram.

    (l)     Director, Institute of Human Resource of Development for Electronics.

  (m)    Public  Relations  Officer,  Directorate  of  Technical  Education,

Thiruvananthapuram.

   Note.- The benefit of Rule 60 (c) part I Kerala Service Rules will be available

to the above officers only if the incumbents holding the posts descent

from the teaching faculty.

            The items (a) to (j) above shall be deemed to have come into force on
the 2nd day of July 1990 and items (k) to (m) shall be deemed to have
come into force on the 19th day of October 1990.

*[G O(P) No.1034/1997/Fin., Dated 12/11/1997]

115

CHAP VIII ]

COMPULSORY RETIREMENT

[ RULE 60

   Note 1.- *Omitted

   Note 2.- The teaching staff referred to in the above rule who are past the age
of 55 years on the 4th day of May 1967 or who attain the age of 55 years
within a period of three months from that date will continue in service
till the closing day of the academic year 1967-68 (Notes 1 and 2 shall be
deemed to have come into force with effect from the 4th day of May
1967).

  Note 3.-Even in cases where it is found absolutely necessary to retain the
services of an officer who has attained the age of **56 years as far as
possible  only  re-employment  after  retirement  should  be  resorted  to,
which shall not ordinarily be sanctioned for more than one year at a
time.

  Note 4.-In the case of an officer whose year of birth is known but not the exact

month and date the first July shall be taken as the date of birth; where the
year and month are known but not the exact date, the 16th day of the month
shall be taken as the date of birth.

  Note 5.-Except when extension of service is specifically sanctioned the

retirement  of  an  officer  is  automatic  and  no  separate  sanction  is

required.

   Note 6.- For the purpose of this rule as well as the rules in Appendix X, in

the case of an officer who entered service prior to first January 1950

and  whose  date  of  birth  has  been  noted  in    Malabar  Era  in  the

Service Records, the age may be calculated in the Malabar Era.

  **Note 7 .- Completion of 56 years of age in service is in the afternoon and
not  in  the  forenoon.   A  person  whose  date  of  birth  is  first  of  July
completes his 56th year on 30th June, and that date (30th June) is the last

[*Deletion, **Subtitution G O(P) No. 183/2012/Fin., Dated 26/03/2012
(with effect from 26/03/2012)]

116

CHAP VIII ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 60

day of the month in which he completes the 56th year.  On first of July
he is on his 57th year and that day is a non-working day for him.  He
shall cease to be in service on and from the 1st July.

   **Note  8.- A teacher whose date of birth is first July and who attains the age

of 56 years shall not continue in service till the end of the academic

year.

   Note 9.-The benefit contemplated in sub-rule (b) above will not be available

to those reverted to the Last Grade Service, other wise than for want of
vacancy.

             (This will take effect from  the date of orders).

   †The above amendments  (Except Notes 1 to 6 and 9 above) shall be deemed

to have come into force with effect from 5th April 1974.

   !Note 10.- In this rule the words “Last day of the month” used mean the last

day  of  the  month  in  Christian  Era.    In  cases  where  the  date  of

superannuation is calculated in the Malabar Era in accordance with

Note 6,  the corresponding date in the Christian Era shall be reckoned

for arriving at the last day of the month.

   This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect on and

from 5th April 1974.

  **Note 11.- In cases where the academic year in respect of the institutions
under the Director of Public Instruction is extended beyond the 31st of
March  in  any  year,  the  teaching  staff  of  such  institutions  who  are

allowed  to  continue  in  service  beyond  the  date  of  superannuation
under sub-rule (c) shall retire on the last day of March itself.

[**Insertion, G O(P) No.183/2012/Fin., Dated 26/03/2012 with effect from 26/03/2012)]

†[G O(P) No.344/1975/Fin., Dated 31/07/1975]

! [G O(P) No. 11/1976/Fin., Dated 13/01/1976]

117

CHAP VIII ]

COMPULSORY RETIREMENT

[ RULE 60

  **Note 12.-The benefit contemplated in sub-rule (b) above will be available
to the following categories of employees also from the dates indicated
against each.

Sl No.

1.(i)

(ii)

2

3

*4

TABLE

Category

Full  time  Contingent  Employees  who  were
appointed  as  provisional  employees  for  the
period from 1.4.1965 to 31-3-1968 and absorbed
as  Last  Grade  Employees  of  regular
establishment with effect from 7.4.1970.

Full  time  Contingent  Employees  who  were
appointed  as  provisional  employees  for  the
period from 1.4.1968 to 7.4.1970 and absorbed as
Last Grade Employees of regular establishment
with effect from  7.4.1970

Villagemen who were in service on 7.4.1970 and
who are continuing as such

Ex-Servicemen who had been  in  Armed Forces
prior to 7-4-1970 and appointed as Village men in
the State Service after 7.4.1970 and continuing
as  such.

Ex-Assam Rifles personnel who were in Assam
Rifles prior to 7th April, 1970 and who have been
appointed as Last Grade Employees in the Last
Grade Service in the State Service after  the 7th
April, 1970 and continuing as such

Date from which the
benefit  shall  be
deemed to have come
into force.

27.10.1988

29.11.1989

11.3.1976

1.1.1992

19.9.1995

**[G O(P) No. 11/1996/Fin., Dated 01/01/1996]

* [G O(P) No.904/1997/Fin., Dated 22/10/1997]

118

CHAP VIII ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 60-60A

**5

**6

Ex-CRPF personnel who were in CRPF prior to  7th
April , 1970 and who have been appointed as Last
Grade Employees in the service of  the State after
7th April 1970 and continuing as such.

Ex-BSF  personnel who were in BSF  prior to 7th
April, 1970 and who have been appointed as Last
Grade Employees in the service of the State after
7th April 1970 and continuing as such.

They  shall  come  into  force  at  once.

29-5-2000

24-7-2001

              Ruling No. 1

             The term “educational institution” mentioned in the above rule will include
besides the institutions coming under the Education Department, Institutions
such  as  Medical  Colleges, Agricultural  Colleges,  Veterinary  Colleges,
Engineering  Colleges,  Law  Colleges,  Training  Colleges,  Polytechnics,
Industrial Schools, Fisheries Schools and such other Educational Institutions
which have regular authorised vacations.

               Ruling No. 2

                *The teaching staff of educational institutions who are allowed to continue
in service beyond the  date of superannuation till the end of the academic
year will not be eligible for any leave other than casual leave during the
period of their service beyond the date of superannuation and if they apply
for any leave other than casual leave during the period, they shall be retired
from service from the date of such application for leave.

60A.      †[Deleted]

                Effective from 3rd February, 1988

**[Insertion G O(P) No.214/2005/Fin., Dated 11/05/2005]

*[G O(P) No.296/1972/Fin., Dated 18/07/1972]
†[G O(P) No.549/1988/Fin., Dated 31/08/1988]

119

CHAP IX ]

LEAVE

[ RULE 61-62

CHAPTER  IX

LEAVE

SECTION  1

 EXTENT OF APPLICATION

61.           Unless in any case it be otherwise distinctly provided, the rules in this Chapter
apply to all officers to whom these service rules as a whole apply.

62. (1)  Unless in any case it be otherwise distinctly provided by or under these
rules,  an  officer  transferred  to  a  service  or  post  to  which  these  rules
apply, from a service or post to which they do not apply, is not ordinarily
entitled  to leave under these rules in respect of duty performed before
such transfer:

                Provided that in the case of an officer who holds a substantive, officiating or
temporary post on the day previous to the one on which these rules come
into force, the maximum limit of accumulation of earned leave specified in
Rule 78 shall not apply during the period of the  first five years from the date
of his appointment to the service or from that of the commencement of these
rules whichever is later and such an officer may be allowed during the said
period of five years to avail himself of the accumulated leave to his credit:

            Provided further that on the expiry of the said period of five years the
leave at the credit of the officer in excess of the normal maximum limit of
accumulation of leave laid down in Rule 78 shall lapse:

                    Provided  also  that  he  shall  not  earn  leave  during  that  period  unless  the

accumulated leave at his credit falls below 180 days.

       (2)   Subject to the provisions contained in Rule 77(vi), the half pay leave to
be carried forward will be the balance of furlough leave or leave on half
average pay for which an officer is eligible on the date on which these
rules come into force diminished by the leave on medical certificate taken
before such date, under the old rules governing him.

120

CHAP VIII ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 63-64

63.   (a)   If an officer, who quits the public service on compensation or invalid pension
or gratuity, is re-employed and if his gratuity is thereupon refunded or his
pension  held  wholly  in  abeyance,  his  past  service  thereby  becoming
pensionable on ultimate retirement, he may, at the discretion of the Government
and to such extent as the Government may decide, count his former service
towards leave.

      (b)  An officer who is dismissed or removed from the public service, but is
reinstated on appeal or revision, is entitled to count his former service
for leave.

   Note 1.- The re-employment of a person who has retired on a superannuation
or retiring pension is generally an exceptional and temporary expedient.
In  such  cases,  the  service  of  the  re-employed  pensioner  should  be
regarded as temporary and his leave during the period of re-employment
regulated by the rules in Appendix VIII.

   Note 2.- Resignation of public service even though it is followed immediately
by re-employment entails forfeiture of past service and constitutes an
interruption of duty.  But resignation to take up another appointment
does not constitute an interruption.

SECTION  II

GENERAL CONDITIONS

64.         The Government may issue orders specifying the authority by whom leave
other than *leave without allowances exceeding a period of four months at
a time, may be granted.

               **Effective from 6th March 1968.

             !The power to sanction leave without allowances exceeding a period of

four months at a time will rest with Government.

*[Deletion G O(P) No.65/2007/Fin., Dated 19/02/2007]
** [G O(P) No. 481/1970/Fin., Dated. 06/07/1970]
! [G O(P) No.313/1976/Fin., Dated 05/10/1976]

121

CHAP IX ]

LEAVE

[ RULES 64-66

             This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from

14th November 1966.

65.        Leave cannot be claimed as a matter of right.  When the exigencies of the
public  service  so  require,  discretion  to  refuse  or  revoke  leave  of  any
description is reserved to the authority empowered to grant it.

   Note.- The nature of the leave due and applied for by an officer cannot be
altered at the option of the sanctioning authority and while  it is open
to  the  sanctioning  authority  to  refuse  or  revoke  the  leave  due  and
applied for, it is not open to him to alter the nature of such leave.

66.         Leave ordinarily begins on the day on which transfer of charge is effected
and ends on the day preceding that on which charge is resumed.  When
the day immediately preceding the day on which an officer’s leave begins
or immediately following the day on which his leave expires is a holiday
or one of a series of holidays, the officer may leave his station at the
close of the day before, or return to it on the day following such holiday
or series of holidays; provided that-

                (a)    his transfer or assumption of charge does not involve the handing or
taking over of securities or of money other than a permanent advance;

                  (b)    his early departure does not entail a correspondingly early transfer

from another station of an officer to perform his duties; and

                (c)   the delay in his return does not involve a corresponding delay in the
transfer to another station of the officer who was performing his duties
during his absence or in the discharge from Government service of a
person temporarily appointed to it.

              Ruling

                  *A restricted holiday enjoyed with the permission of the competent authority

shall be treated as holiday for the purpose of this rule.

*[G O(P) No.458/1966/Fin., Dated 13/10/1966]

122

CHAP IX ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 67-68

67.          On condition that the departing officer remains responsible for the money in
his charge, a competent authority may declare that proviso (a) under Rule 6 is
not applicable to any particular case.

68.         Unless the competent authority in any case otherwise directs-

               (a)    if holidays are prefixed to leave, the leave and any consequent re-
arrangement of pay and allowances takes effect from the first day
after holidays; and

                   (b)      if holidays are affixed to leave, the leave is treated as having terminated
on, and any consequent re-arrangement of pay and allowances takes
effect from, the day on which the leave would have ended, if holidays
had not been affixed.

              The following procedure is prescribed when vacation or gazetted holidays

are permitted to be prefixed or affixed to leave :-

  *Note 1.-(i)   When they are prefixed to leave, the officer proceeding on leave
will report before leaving the station, or if for urgent reasons the leave
is granted during vacation or gazetted holidays, as soon as it is granted
that he will cease to discharge the duties of his post with effect from the
end of vacation or holidays.  The relieving officer will then assume the
duties of the post at the end of the vacation or holidays in the ordinary
course.

  (ii)    When a vacation or holidays are affixed to leave, the officiating officer
will be relieved in the ordinary way before the vacation, or holidays,
and the officer on leave will return at the end of the vacation or holidays,
but  will  be  regarded  as  having  assumed  the  duties  of  the  post  with
effect from the commencement of the vacation or holidays.

  (iii)   Except in cases covered by (i) and (ii) above, transfer of charge
certificates  should  be  signed  by  both    the  relieved  and  relieving

*[G O(P) No. 482/1982/Fin., Dated  26/08/1982]

123

CHAP IX ]

LEAVE

[ RULE 68

officers on the day on which charge is transferred.

  *Note 2.- (i) When a Government Servant is certified medically unfit to attend

office,  holiday(s)  if any immediately preceding the day he is so certified

shall be allowed automatically to be prefixed to leave and the holiday(s)

if any immediately succeeding  the day he is so certified (including that

day) shall be treated as part of the leave; and

  (ii)    When a Government Servant is certified medically fit for joining duty,

holiday(s) if any, succeeding the day he is so certified (including that
day) shall automatically be allowed to be suffixed to the leave, and

holiday(s) if any, preceding the day he is so certified shall be treated as

part of the leave.

 (iii)   Except in cases covered by (i) and (ii) above, transfer of charge

certificates  should  be  signed  by  both  the  relieved  and  relieving

officers on the day on which charge is transferred.

           The note shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from

26th  August 1982.

               Ruling No. 1

          **A  restricted  holiday  enjoyed  with  the  permission  of  the  competent

authority shall be treated as holiday for the purpose of this rule.

               Ruling No. 2

                  !There is no objection to an officer in a vacation Department being  permitted

to suffix holiday (s) to leave and also to enjoy the vacation in continuation of

the holiday so suffixed to leave.

*[G O(P) No. 482/1982/Fin., Dated  26/08/1982]

**[G O(P) No. 458/1966/Fin., Dated 13/10/1966]

! [G O(P) No. 109/1981/Fin., Dated 09/02/1981]

124

CHAP IX ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 69-71

69.       An officer on leave may not take any service or accept any employment

without obtaining the previous sanction of the authority empowered to fill

up the post held by him.

   Note.-  This rule does not apply to casual literary work, or to service as an

examiner or similar employment; nor does it apply to acceptance of

foreign service, which is governed by the rules under Chapter XI.

70.         All orders recalling an officer to duty before the expiry of his leave should

state whether the return to duty is optional or compulsory.  If the return is
optional, the officer is entitled to no concession.  But if it is compulsory he

is entitled to be treated as on duty from the date on which he starts for the

station to which he is ordered, and to draw Travelling Allowance under rules

made in this behalf for the journey, but to draw until he joins his post, leave

salary only.

71.         No officer who has been granted leave on medical certificate may return to

duty without first producing a medical certificate of fitness in the following

form from a Medical Officer not below the rank of an Assistant Surgeon or

the Director of Indigenous Medicine.

Signature of applicant

               We, the members of a Medical Committee

               I, Civil Surgeon/Assistant Surgeon of

               Registered Medical  Practitioner of

               Director of Indigenous Medicine

           do hereby certify that I / we have carefully examined ABC of the ……….

Department, whose signature is given above and find that he has recovered

from his illness and is now fit to resume duties in Government Service.  I/we

also certify that before arriving at this decision  I / we have examined the

original medical  certificate(s) and statement(s) of the case (or certified copies

125

CHAP IX ]

LEAVE

[ RULES 71-72

thereof)  on which leave was granted or extended, and have taken these into

consideration in arriving at my/our decision.

Place: …………

Date: ………….

              The original medical certificate(s) and statement(s) of the case on which the

leave  was  originally  granted  or  extended  shall  be  produced  before  the

authority asked to issue the above certificate(s).

   Note.-  If the officer on leave is not a Gazetted Officer the authority under

which the officer will be employed on return from leave may, in its

discretion  accept  a  certificate  signed  by  any  registered  medical

practitioner.  For this purpose original certificate(s) of the case should

be  prepared  in  duplicate,  one  copy  being  retained  by  the  officer

concerned.

72.(1)    An officer on leave may not return to duty before the expiry of the period

of leave granted to him, unless he is permitted to do so by the authority

which granted him leave.

        (2)      Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  sub-rule  (1)  an  officer  on  leave

preparatory to retirement shall be precluded from withdrawing his request

for permission to retire and from returning to duty, save with the consent of

the authority empowered to appoint him.

   Note 1.- No formal cancellation of the unexpired portion of leave is necessary

when an officer returns to duty before the expiry of his leave.  The

cancellation will be effected by the Audit Officer in the case of Gazetted
Officers and by the Head of office in the case of non- gazetted officers.

  *Note 2.- (a) and (b) [Deleted]

* [G O(P) No. 645/1981/Fin., Dated  13/10/1981]

126

CHAP IX ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 72-73

               Ruling

**When  the  officer  proceeds  on  leave  from  the  post  in  which  he  is  re-
employed and avails of the refused leave during the period of re-employment
or after, the leave salary would be same as would have been admissible in the
normal course but for re-employment reduced by the amount of pension
and/or pension equivalent of gratuity and other retirement benefits.

               Government Decision

               † Initial pay on re-employment should be fixed at the minimum stage of the
time-scale of pay prescribed for the post in which an individual is employed.

In cases where it is felt that the fixation of initial pay of the re-employed
officer at the minimum of the time-scale will cause undue hardship, the pay
may be fixed at a higher stage by allowing one increment for each year of
service which the officer has rendered before retirement in a post not lower
than that in which he is re-employed subject however to the proviso to Rule
119, Part III of these rules.

                Effective from 20th June 1964.

  Note 2.-(c) The leave salary of an officer who is permitted during leave
preparatory to retirement before attaining the age of superannuation,
or during leave under Rule 75 to take up employment under any other
Government under a private employer or employment payable from a
local fund, will also be restricted during such employment as in (b)
above.

73.         *Any kind of leave under these rules may be granted in combination with or
in continuation of any other kind of leave except leave under Appendices

**[G O(P) No. 218/1968/Fin., Dated 15/05/1968]
†[G O(P) No. 426/1964/Fin., Dated 20/06/1964 &
    G O(P)No.  218/1968/Fin., Dated 15/05/1968]

* [G O(P) No. 1002/1997/Fin., Dated 06/11/1997]

127

CHAP IX ]

LEAVE

[ RULES 73-74

XII A, XII B and XII C.  However, leave under Appendices XII A and XII C

may be granted in combination with or in continuation of the leave under

Appendices  XII A and XII C.

              This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 12th

April 1984.

              Ruling

            **The eligibility for leave is determined with reference to the eligibility on

the date on which an officer proceeds on leave.

74.          Vacation may be taken in combination with or in continuation of any kind of

leave, provided the total duration of vacation and earned leave taken together,

whether the earned leave is taken in combination with or in continuation of

other leave or not, shall not exceed the amount of earned leave due and

admissible to the officer at a time under Rules 78 and 79.  The combination of

earned leave and commuted leave will be limited to 240 days. There will be

no limit on the half-pay leave that can be availed of at a time on medical

certificate or private affairs. This will apply even when such leave is taken

preparatory to retirement.

               Government Decision No.  1

             † It is permissible to allow a vacation to intervene between two periods of
leave.  Similarly vacation may be prefixed or suffixed to leave or both prefixed

and suffixed.  The only restriction is that the total duration of vacations and

earned leave together should not exceed the amount of  earned leave due

and admissible to the officer under Rules 78 and 79, Part I, Kerala Service

Rules and that the duration of the total period of vacation, earned leave and

commuted leave taken together shall not exceed 240 days.

**[G O(P) No. 309/1976/Fin., Dated 29/09/1976]

† [Circular No. 90/1963/Fin., Dated 16/12/1963]

128

CHAP IX ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 74-77

               Government Decision No. 2

          †Special casual leave may be combined with vacation, but in such cases
combination of special casual leave with ordinary casual leave will not be
permitted.

75.            **No  leave  shall  be  granted  beyond  the  date  on  which  an  officer  must

compulsorily retire:

             The provisos, the explanations and the Notes 1 to 7 omitted with effect

from 13th October 1981.

76.          Any leave granted under these rules may be retrospectively commuted into
any other kind of leave admissible to the officer at the time the original leave
was granted:

             Provided that earned leave shall not be commuted into leave of a different
kind, *except as provided in the Note below Rule 1, Appendix XII C.

              *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from

12th April 1984.

               !Provided further that no commutation of leave shall be permitted on expiry

of one year from the date of sanction of leave.

SECTION  III

GRANT OF LEAVE

77.         In these rules :-

              (i)   ‘Ordinary leave’ includes earned leave, half-pay leave, commuted leave,

leave not due and leave without allowances.

†[G O(P) No. 216/1976/Fin., Dated  24/07/1976]

**[G O(P) No. 645/1981/Fin., Dated 13/10/1981]

*[G O(P) No. 1002/1997/Fin., Dated 06/11/1997]

! [Insertion G O(P) No. 23/2013/Fin., Dated 10/01/2013 (with effect from 10/01/2013)]

129

CHAP IX ]

LEAVE

[ RULE 77

                   (ii)   ‘Special leave’ includes disability leave, maternity leave, *paternity

leave, †child adoption leave  and hospital leave.

                (iii)    ‘Earned leave’ means leave earned in respect of periods spent on duty.

              (iv)    ‘Half-pay leave’ means leave earned in respect of completed years of

service.

                 (v)   ‘Earned leave due’ means the amount of privilege leave/earned leave to

the credit of an officer under the rules previously in force on the day

immediately preceding the date on which these rules came into force
plus the earned leave calculated as prescribed in these rules diminished

by the amount of earned leave taken after the date on which these rules

came into force.

                 (vi)    ‘Half-pay leave due’ means the amount of half-pay leave calculated

as prescribed in Rule 83 for the entire service diminished by the

amount of leave on private affairs and leave on medical certificate

taken before these rules came into force and half-pay leave taken

on or after the date:

              Provided that in the case of officers who are given credit for the half-pay leave

admissible to them as on the date of coming into force of these rules in accordance

with the provision contained in Rule 62 (2), the half-pay leave according to these

rules will be calculated only on the service rendered from the date on which

these rules come into force:

               Provided also that where such leave on private affairs and leave on medical

certificate already  availed of is in excess of the period of half-pay leave due,

reckoned under this rule as on the date on which these rules come into force,

such excess shall be wiped off,

*[Insertion G O(P) No. 27/2013/Fin., Dated 15/01/2013  (with effect from 26/02/2011)]

†[Insertion G O(P) No. 76/2010/Fin., Dated 18/02/2010 (with effect from 31/08/2007)]

130

CHAP IX ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 77

              (vii)    ‘Commuted leave’ means leave taken under Rule 84.

             (viii)     ‘Officer in permanent employ’ means an officer who holds substantively
a permanent post or who holds a lien on a permanent post or who would
hold a lien on a permanent post had the lien not been suspended.

                 (ix)    ‘Completed  years of service’ and ‘one year’s continuous service’ mean
continuous service of the specified duration under the Government of
Kerala and include periods spent on duty as well as on leave including
leave without allowances.

              Ruling

                *The period of leave without allowances availed of under Appendix XIIA for
taking up employment will be excluded in reckoning completed years of service
for purposes of calculating half-pay leave to be earned under Rule 83 Part I
Kerala Service Rules.

               Government Decision No.1

               ** Under Article 195, Travancore Service Regulations and Article 130 (4) of
the old leave Rules in the Cochin Service Regulations, privilege leave on half
salary can be granted in case of urgent necessity to an officer serving in a
vacation department who enjoys the benefit of vacation.  As the privilege
leave is not earned but only granted in cases of urgent necessity, neither
credit towards leave on this account need be made in the leave account of
the officer as on 1st November 1959 under Kerala Service Rules for such
leave already availed of prior to 1st November 1959 reduced from the half-pay
leave admissible under Rule 77 (vi), Kerala Service Rules.

              Furlough on average salary taken prior to 1st November  1959 is to be reduced
from the half-pay leave by twice the amount of such leave for purposes of Rule
77 (vi) Kerala Service Rules.

*[G O(P) No. 1171/1987/Fin., Dated 30/12/1987]
** [Circular. No. 17422/1960/Fin., Dated 30/03/1960]

131

CHAP IX ]

LEAVE

[ RULES 77-79

               Government Decision No.2

          † According  to  G.O.(Ms)  101,  dated  22nd January  1958  of  the  Madras
Government, the benefit of Rule 27 of the Madras Leave Rules, 1933 to
certain approved probationers stand extended upto 31st December 1962.  In
the case of those officers allotted from Madras, governed by Madras Leave

Rules and who were eligible for the above concession and who have opted
to be governed by the Kerala Service Rules from 1st November 1959,  the
accrued leave reckoned on the basis of the concession but not availed of by
them on 1st November 1959 will be treated as leave standing to their credit for
purposes of Rule 77 (v) Kerala Service Rules.

78.           The earned leave admissible to an officer in permanent employ is one-eleventh

of the period  spent on duty,  provided that he will cease to earn  such leave

when the earned leave due amounts *300 days.

               *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st

November, 1998.

79.         Subject to the Provisions of Rules 65 and 75 the maximum earned leave

that may be granted at a time to an officer shall be # 180 days.

              # This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st

November,1998.

    Exception.-  In  the  case  of  an  officer  applying  for  leave  preparatory  to

retirement, the maximum earned leave that may  be granted at a time

shall be *300 days.

   *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from

1st November, 1998.

†[G O(Ms) No. 477/1960/Fin., Dated 11/10/1960]

*[G O(P) No. 130/2002/Fin., Dated 13/03/2002]

# [G O(P) No. 908/1997/Fin., Dated 24/10/1997]

132

CHAP IX ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 80-81

80.         Earned leave is not admissible to an officer in permanent employ serving  in
a vacation department in respect of duty performed in any year in which he
avails himself of the full vacation.

               Ruling

Officers undergoing training in institutions which have regular vacations
and who enjoy vacations of those institutions, will be treated as officers
serving in a vacation department for the purpose of Rule 80 Part I, Kerala
Service Rules.

81.        The earned leave admissible to an officer in permanent employ serving in a
vacation department, in respect of any year in which he is prevented from
availing himself of the full vacation, is such proportion of 30 days as the
number of days of vacation not taken bears to the full vacation.

             If in any year the officer does not avail himself of the vacation, earned
leave will be admissible to him in respect of that year in accordance with
the provisions of Rules 78 and 79 above.

  Note 1.- A vacation department is a department or part of a department to
which regular vacations are allowed during which the officers serving
in the department are permitted to be absent from duty.

  Note 2.-The Principal, the Superintendent, the entire office staff, sergeant (if
any) and the gardeners of the following institutions will be treated as
non-vacation officers with effect from the dates specified against each:

           1.

Government Arts Colleges

           2.

 Law Colleges, Training Colleges and

Physical Education Colleges

  :  1.11.1959

  :  8.03.1960

           3.

Engineering Colleges and Polytechnics

  :  13.6.1960

           4.

Junior Technical Schools

          :  18.5.1963

133

CHAP IX ]

LEAVE

[ RULE 81

              *The  Teaching  staff  in  the  Hindi  Teachers’  Training  Institutes  at

Trivandrum and Trichur will be treated as non-vacation officers with
effect from 4th June 1970.

           **The headmasters of schools and non-teaching staff of the schools

under the Director of Public Instruction will be treated as non-vacation

officers with effect from the date noted against each:-

             Headmasters of schools

             Non teaching staff

:

:

9.6.1969

22.4.1960

  Exception.- !The Superintendents of the Junior Technical Schools attached

to the Polytechnics at Kannur, Calicut and Trichur will be treated as

vacation officers.

          This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect

from 1st April 1967.

             †The Senior Agricultural Officer/Veterinary Surgeon and Attenders in High
Schools where Vocational Higher Secondary Courses were introduced, will
be treated as non-vacation officers with effect  from 13th August 1984.

              †The Assistant Director of Fisheries and Attenders in the High Schools
where  Fisheries  have  been  introduced    as  vocational  subject,  will  be
treated as non-vacation officers with effect from 28th May 1986.

  Note 3.-The term “Year” should be interpreted to mean, not a calendar year in

which duty is performed,  but twelve months of actual duty in a vacation

department.

*[G O(P) No. 205/1972/Fin., Dated 16/06/1972]

**[G O(P) No. 39/1973/Fin., Dated  05/02/1973]

! [G O(P) No. 78/1970/Fin., Dated 29/01/1970]
»[G O(P) No. 95/1989/Fin., Dated 24/02/1989]

134

CHAP IX ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 81

   Note 4.-  When an officer is transferred from a vacation department to a non-

vacation department, his period of service in the former will, for the

purpose of calculation of leave, be considered to have terminated with

effect from the close of the last vacation enjoyed by him. * [But if the

transfer is effected during the course of vacation, he will be deemed to

have been transferred to the non-vacation department on the close of

the vacation which he has partly enjoyed and he will be credited with

proportionate amount of earned leave under this rule for the period of

vacation which he was prevented from enjoying on account of such
transfer].    When  an  officer  is  transferred  from  a  non-vacation  to  a

vacation department,  his period of service in the latter will be held to

have commenced from the  date of expiry of the last vacation previous

to such transfer.

            * This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect

from 6th August 1982.

               Government Decision

             † The above Note shall apply to appointments of Government Officers in a
vacation Department through the Public Service Commission while working

in non-vacation Department in the course of the academic year and vice

versa.

  # Note 5.- The Library staff of Arts and Science, Training and Law Colleges

shall be treated as non-vacation staff.

          This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect

from 7th November 1974.

*[G O(P) No. 409/1982/Fin., Dated 06/08/1982]

†[G O(P) No. 573/1981/Fin., Dated 02/09/1981]

# [G O(P) No. 553/1975/Fin., Dated 11/12/1975]

135

CHAP IX ]

LEAVE

[ RULE 81

  *Note 6.- The Heads of Nursery Schools shall be treated as non-vacation

staff.
This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect
from 11th February 1976.

    Note  7.-  In  the  case  of  an  officer  of  non-vacation  department  sent  on
deputation for training to an institution having regular vacation,  his
eligibility for earned leave shall be decided as follows:-

               (i)    if the officer is not permitted to enjoy the vacation and is retained
by  the  institution  for  duty,  and  if  the  head  of  the  institution  so
certifies,  the officer shall be considered as on duty during that
period and earned leave for that period shall be admissible to him
in accordance with the provisions of Rules 78 and 79.

          !(ii)   if the officer enjoys only part of the vacation, deduction of earned
leave will be in such proportion of 30 days as the number of days of
vacation enjoyed bears to the full vacation.

                 Effective  from 1st July 1975.

              Ruling No. 1

              †An officer serving in a vacation department when put in full additional
charge  of  the  duties  of  a  post  in  a  non-vacation  department  shall  be
considered  to  have  been  denied  the  benefit  of  vacation  if  that  charge
arrangement falls within a vacation period.

              Ruling No. 2

               †Teachers deputed for training under the Summer School Training Programme
during  vacation  shall  be  considered  to  have  been  prevented  from  availing

*[G O(P) No. 230/1976/Fin., Dated 03/08/1976]

 ! [G O(P) No. 887/1980/Fin., Dated 21/11/1980]
†[G O(P) No. 366/1970/Fin., Dated 27/05/1970]

136

CHAP IX ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 81-81A

themselves  of  the  vacation  provided  such  period  of  training  has  been
treated as duty under Rule 12 (7).

               Ruling No. 3

               *Teaching staff who are N.C.C. Officers in Colleges, Polytechnics and Schools,
when detailed to undergo training or refresher course or for duty in connection
with the conduct of N.C.C. training or refresher course, during periods of vacation,
will be treated as on duty and allowed the benefit of earned leave under the
above rule.

            The ruling shall be deemed to have come into force from 15th February

1972.

               Ruling No. 4

              † Teaching Staff attending the work of Valuation and Tabulation of S.S.L.C.
and Higher Secondary Public Examination during vacation shall be considered
to have been prevented from availing themselves of the vacation and such
period will be treated as duty and allowed the benefit of earned leave under
the rule.

81.A     # The earned leave admissible to an officer in permanent employ in the
vacation department, who is prevented from availing himself of vacation
in  full  and  whose  actual  period  of  duty  is  less  than  one  year  due  to
superannuation, shall be calculated in such proportion for full block year
as the number of days of actual duty bears to the full year. The amount of
earned  leave  admissible  shall  be  worked  out  under  the  formula  given
below,-

               Number of days of vacation duty    x 30 x    Days of actual duty

             Full vacation

                                    365/366

*[G O(P) No. 364/1972/Fin., Dated  16/08/1972]
†[G O(P) No. 3113/1998/Fin., Dated 15/12/1998]
# [Insertion G O(P) No. 75/2010/Fin., Dated 18/02/2010 (with effect from 18/02/2010)]

137

CHAP IX ]

LEAVE

[ RULES 82-85

82.          Half-pay leave.- Half-pay leave as provided in Rule 83 may be availed of

on private affairs or on medical certificate.

83.          The half-pay leave admissible to an officer in permanent employ in respect of

each completed year of service is 20 days.

84.       †Commuted Leave.- Commuted leave not exceeding half the amount of
half-pay leave due may be granted  to an officer in permanent employ.

When Commuted Leave is granted twice the amount of such leave shall

be debited against the half-pay leave due.

              Ruling No. 1

              # [Deleted]

              Ruling No. 2

              # [Deleted]

85.           Leave not due.- Save in the case of leave preparatory to retirement leave not due

may be granted to an officer in permanent employ for a period not exceeding 360

days during his entire service out of which not more than 90 days at a time and

180 days in all may be otherwise than on medical certificate.  This will be debited

against half-pay leave which the officer earns subsequently.  Leave not due

should be granted *[only when no other leave with allowance is available at

credit of the officer and if the authority empowered to sanction leave] is satisfied

that there is a reasonable prospect of the officer returning to duty on the expiry

of the leave and earning an equal amount of half pay leave thereafter.

   Note 1.- Where a Government servant who has been granted leave not due

under this rule, applies for permission to retire voluntarily, the leave

not due shall, if the permission is granted, be cancelled.

 †[G O(P) No. 540/1987/Fin., Dated  20/06/1987]
# [G O(P) No. 685/1987/Fin., Dated 19/08/1987]
* [G O(P) No. 409/1977/Fin., Dated  24/10/1977]

138

CHAP IX ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 85-86

   Note 2.- Except as provided in Note 1, leave not due when granted should in

all cases (subject to the officer’s wishes) be allowed to stand, including

cases in which the officer fails to earn it by subsequent duty.

              Government Decision

               *A question has been raised whether in cases where the officers whose credit in
half-pay leave account results in a minus balance on 1st November 1959 can be
granted a further period of 360 days leave not due under Rule 85, Part I, Kerala

Service Rules. This has been examined by Government and they consider that in
view of the second proviso to the amendment to clause (vi) of Rule 77, Part I,
issued in G.O.(P) 261/Fin., dated 23rd May 1960, the half-pay leave availed of prior
to 1st November 1959 in excess of the half-pay leave reckoned under Kerala
Service Rules has been wiped off.  Therefore such officers should be treated as
leaving a nil balance of half-pay leave on 1st November 1959 and they should get
the same consideration in regard to the grant of leave not due as in the case of
those who had not enjoyed half-pay leave in excess of what is admissible under

Kerala Service Rules. The Government accordingly direct that officers whose
credit on half-pay leave account results in a ‘nil’ balance on 1st November 1959
consequent on the wiping off of the excess half-pay leave already available shall

be eligible for a further period of 360 days, leave not due under Rule 85, Part I,

Kerala Service Rules, provided they otherwise satisfy the requirements of the

rules.

86.       The provisions of Rules 78, 80, 81, and 83, apply also to an officer not in

permanent  employ  except  that  in  respect  of  the  first  year  of  service  the

earned leave admissible is 1/22 of the period spent on duty:

              Provided that no earned leave shall be admissible to such an officer in a

vacation department in respect of the first year of his service.

* [G O(Ms) No. 524/1960/Fin., Dated  07/11/1960]

139

CHAP IX ]

LEAVE

[ RULES 86-86A

  Note 1.-The leave of an officer appointed as a probationer (for a certain

period before confirmation of his appointment) will be regulated under

the  rules  prescribed  for  permanent  officers.    If  for  any  reason  it  is

proposed to terminate the services of a probationer any leave which

may be granted to him shall not extend beyond the date on which the

probationary period as already sanctioned or extended expires, or any

earlier date on which his services are terminated by the orders of the

authority competent to appoint him.

    Note  2.-Whenever  the  rate  of  earning  leave  changes,  the  fraction  in  the

earned leave accumulated at the earlier rate should be rounded off to

the nearest day i.e., fraction below half should be ignored and that of

half and more should be reckoned as a day.  *Similarly, the fraction, if

any, in the leave earned in accordance with the provisions of the first

paragraph of Rule 81 by an officer serving in a vacation department

should also be rounded off to the nearest day.

              Ruling

              † When a full-time teacher is appointed to a part-time post, the leave earned by
him prior to becoming part-time cannot be granted to him while holding the part-

time post.  Such leave may, however, be granted when he is reappointed to a full-

time post.

@86A.     Notwithstanding anything contained in Rules 84, 86, 88 (ii) and 90, an officer

not in permanent employ who has completed three years of continuos service

shall be eligible for (i) commutted leave, (ii) earned leave and (iii) leave

*[G O(P) No. 230/1967/Fin., Dated  20/06/1967]

† [G O(P) No. 275/1965/Fin., Dated 05/07/1965]

@ [Substitution G O(P) No. 75/2007/Fin., Dated  27/02/2007]

140

CHAP IX ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 86A-88

without allowances as would be admissible to him if he had held his post

substantively.

87.          An officer not in permanent employ appointed without interruption of duty

substantively to a permanent post will be credited with the earned leave

which would have been admissible if his previous duty had been duty as an

officer in permanent employ diminished by any earned leave already taken.

Leave is not an interruption of duty for the purpose of this rule.

88.         Leave without allowances.-

               (i)   Leave without allowances may be granted to *any officer in regular

employment in special circumstances-

            ** Provided that the leave of person appointed under rule 9(a)(i) of the

Kerala State  and Subordinate Service Rules 1958 shall  be regulated by

rules under Appendix VIII of these rules, unless he is already an officer

on regular employment

 (a)   when no other leave is by rule admissible, or

 (b)   when other leave is admissible, but the officer concerned applies

in writing for the grant of leave without allowances.

               (ii)   Except in the case of an officer in permanent employ, the duration of

leave  without  allowances  shall  not  exceed  3  months  on  any  one

occasion.

                   (iii)    † When the period of absence of any Officer is without proper application
for leave, Government may retrospectively convert the period of absence

into  leave  without  allowance  even  when  any  other  kind  of  leave  was

admissible at the time of absence.

* & ** [G O(P) No. 216/2005/Fin., Dated  11/05/2005]
† [G O(P) No. 99/2002/Fin., Dated 31/01/2002]

141

CHAP IX ]

LEAVE

[ RULES 88-89

  *Exception  1.-When  a  period  of  suspension  is  retrospectively  treated  as

leave without allowances by the revising or appellate authority the

limitation of admissible leave without allowances to three months to

officers not in permanent employ will not apply.

   #Exception 2.-The limitation in sub-rule (ii) shall not apply to the grant of
leave without allowances regulated by the rules in †Appendices XIIA,
XIIB and XIIC.

SECTION IV

COMMUTATION OF LEAVE WITH
RETROSPECTIVE EFFECT

89.   (i)   The authority which granted leave to an officer can commute it retrospectively
into leave of a different kind which may be admissible but the officer concerned
cannot claim it as a matter of right:

              *Provided that earned leave shall not be commuted into leave of a different
kind †except as provided in the Note below Rule 1, Appendix XIIC.

               *Effective from 22nd November 1971.

              †This shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 12th April 1984.

                ! Provided further that no commutation of leave shall be permitted on expiry

of one year from the date of sanction of leave.

      (ii)   Commutation of one kind of leave into another automatically carries with it the
drawal of arrears of leave salary or recovery of amounts overdrawn.

#[G O(P) No. 654/1995/Fin., Dated 10/10/1995,

G O(P) No. 953/1986/Fin., Dated 27/12/1986]
†,* [G O(P) No. 1002/1997/Fin., Dated  06/11/1997]

 ! [Insertion G O(P) No. 23/2013/Fin., Dated 10/01/2013 (with effect from 10/01/2013)]

142

CHAP IX ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 89

    (iii)   Commutation of leave without allowances taken during temporary service
when  no  other  leave  was  due,  into  earned  leave  on  confirmation  without
interruption of service, by giving retrospective effect to the benefit of Rule 87
would be irregular and not in accordance with the intention of Government.

The real intention of Rule 87 is to provide only for a retrospective recalculation

of leave at credit on the date of confirmation with a reduction on account

of the earned leave already taken.  Except for the carry-forward of the

recalculated credit on confirmation, leave earned and taken should be a

closed chapter at that point and no readjustment of any leave taken is
automatically permissible as a consequence of such recalculation. The

closed  chapter  may  however  properly  be  re-opened,  for  instance,  to

correct  a  miscalculation  of  leave  earned  or  taken  or  to  readjust  leave

earned  and  taken  when  confirmation  is  ordered  with  retrospective  effect

or  at  the  discretion  of  the  sanctioning  authority  to  convert  leave  of  any

one kind already taken into leave due of any other kind admissible at the

time leave was originally taken.

               Government Decision

                  When confirmation is given retrospectively with effect from a date earlier

than the date on which leave was already sanctioned, such leave can be

commuted and readjusted as provided in Rule 89 (iii).  Such cases do not

come within the purview of the ruling under Rule 11.  What has changed

is only the status of the officer and not the rule in force at the time the

leave  was  sanctioned.    The  position  will  be  clear  from  the  following

illustration:-

Illustration

                Entry in service of an officer- 1st November 1960.

                  Date of his confirmation- 1st November 1961 (orders issued on 1st November

1962).

143

CHAP IX ]

LEAVE

[ RULES 89-90A

               ** Leave without allowances taken at any time during the period from 1st
November 1960 to 31st October 1961 cannot be retrospectively commuted
into any other kind of leave.  But leave earned and taken after 1st November
1961 can be retrospectively commuted.

90.             In  addition  to  any  leave  which  may  be  admissible  to  him,  an  officer  in
temporary employ, who contracts tuberculosis and undergoes treatment in
a recognised sanatorium or under a qualified T.B Specialist or a Civil Surgeon
or who is suffering from leprosy and undergoes treatment in a recognised
Leprosy  institution  or  under  a  Civil  Surgeon  or  a  Specialist  in  Leprosy,
recognised as such *or who is suffering from cancer and undergoes treatment
in a recognised Cancer Institute or under a Civil Surgeon or a Specialist in
cancer or who is suffering from mental disease and undergoes treatment in
a recognised Mental Hospital or under a Civil Surgeon  or a Specialist in
mental disease may be granted leave without pay upto a maximum period of
18 months [including 3 months leave without allowances authorised under
Rule 88 (ii) above] on any one occasion subject to the following conditions:-

                (i)    the officer is likely to continue in service till his return to duty;

                    (ii)     the leave without allowances shall be granted subject to the production
of a certificate from the Medical Officer-in-charge of the Sanatorium or
qualified T.B. Specialist or a Civil Surgeon * or a Specialist in Leprosy,
Cancer or Mental disease as the case may be specifying the period for
which leave is recommended; and

          (iii)  the medical officer in recommending leave shall bear in mind the

provisions of Rule 115.

90A.(a)  A Government officer, whether gazetted or non gazetted, drawing a basic pay
not exceeding † ````` 22360 per mensem who is granted leave without allowances

**[G O(P) No. 204/1966/Fin., Dated  17/05/1966]

* [G O(P) No. 570/1978/Fin., Dated 11/07/1978]
†[Substitution G O(P) No. 406/2013/Fin., Dated 27/08/2013 (with effect from 01/07/2009)]

144

CHAP IX ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 90A

for the treatment of T.B., *Leprosy, Cancer or Mental disease may be granted
an ex-gratia allowance equal to 35 per cent of the basic pay he was drawing
immediately before the commencement of the leave, subject to a maximum of
† ````` 7826 and minimum of  † ````` 5220 per mensem.  **In respect of cases
relating to treatment of cancer and mental diseases, the Rule shall be deemed
to have come into force with effect from 11th July 1978 and in respect of other
cases, with effect form 1st July 1978.

              **This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from

1st July 1978.

               †This shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st July 2009.

        (b)   The allowance will be admissible only when the officer is not eligible for any

other leave with allowances.

        (c)   The allowance will be granted irrespective of whether the patient undergoes
treatment as an inpatient or as an outpatient under the direction of a Civil
Surgeon.

     (d)  The payment of the allowance will be made only on the production of a
certificate issued by the Medical Officer-in-charge of the Sanatorium/Hospital
or by one not below the rank of a Civil Surgeon to the effect that the patient
has been under his treatment for T.B., *Leprosy, Cancer or Mental disease
during the period for which the allowance is claimed.

        (e)   The allowance in the case of an officer in temporary employ will be limited to
a maximum period of 18 months and that in the case of a permanent employ to
a maximum period of 36 months in all during his entire service.

   Note 1.- The concession of leave without allowance upto eighteen months
will be admissible also to an officer who for want of accommodation in

†[Substitution G O(P) No. 406/2013/Fin., Dated 27/08/2013 (with effect from 01/07/2009)]
**[G O(P) No. 373/1983/Fin., Dated 07/07/1983]

*[G O(P) No. 570/1978/Fin., Dated 11/07/1978]

145

CHAP IX ]

LEAVE

[ RULE 90A

any recognised Sanatorium *or Cancer Institute or Mental Hospital at

or near the place of his duty receives treatment at his residence under

a  recognised  *Tuberculosis  Specialist,  Leprosy  Specialist,  Cancer

Specialist or Mental Disease Specialist and produces a certificate signed

by that specialist to the effect that he is under his treatment and that he

has  reasonable  chances  of  recovery  on  the  expiry  of  the  leave

recommended.

   Note 2.-The leave without allowances under this rule will be admissible only

to those officers who have been in continuous Government service for
a period exceeding one year.

    Note  3.-The  lists  of  recognised  *Tuberculosis  Institutions,  Leprosy

Institutions,  Cancer  Institutions  and  Mental  Hospitals  are  given  in

Appendix V.

               Government Decision

            # Recoveries on advances such as ‘Onam Advance’, ‘Advance Pay on
transfer’, etc., need not be made from the ex-gratia allowance admissible

under this rule.  Such recoveries may be postponed till such time as the

subordinate  is  fit  to  rejoin  duty  or  effected  from  any  other  amounts

payable to the subordinate, otherwise.

               Ruling

                 †The payment of ex-gratia allowance in the case of leave without allowances
for treatment of T.B/Leprosy taken in continuation of other kinds of leave

may be regulated on the basis of the pay drawn by the officer immediately

before the commencement of the combined spell of leave.

*[G O(P) No. 570/1978/Fin., Dated 11/07/1978]

# [G O(P) No. 159/1963/Fin., Dated  02/04/1963]
†[G O(P) No. 454/1968/Fin., Dated  20/08/1968]

146

CHAP IX ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 91

91.        Officers with a continuous officiating or temporary service of two years or

more, will be granted in addition to any leave which they are eligible for,

leave under this rule for obtaining superior qualifications (e.g., B.A. and

B.L.), provided, however, that the two years minimum service will not be

insisted on in the case of temporary or officiating officers belonging to the

Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.   Such leave will not, however be

given  for  broken  periods  but  will  cover  the  entire  period  of  the  course

concerned.  In cases of failure, extension of leave will be granted to cover

the further period required for the completion of the course of study.

  *Note 1.- [Deleted]

    Note 2.- The term ‘superior qualifications’ occurring in the above rule denotes

only  such  of  the  qualifications  as  on  acquisition  are  intended  to

enhance  the  usefulness  of  the  Government  servant  concerned  as  a

member of the service or will improve his prospects in the service of

which he is a member.

              Ruling No. 1

             The time limit imposed by Rule 88 (ii) above will not apply to leave for

securing higher qualifications granted under this rule.

               Ruling No. 2

            The term “course” occurring in the above rule denotes a course of study/

training  covering  a  specified  academic  period  culminating  in  a  public

examination, the success in which will qualify the candidate for a degree/

diploma/certificate  or  for  admission  to  another  course  and  includes  the

training at the Pre-examination Training Centres for I.A.S and other All India

Service Examinations.

*[G O(P) No. 204/1976/Fin., Dated  15/07/1976]

147

CHAP IX ]

LEAVE

[ RULES 91-92

               Government Decision

                * Leave under this rule can be sanctioned by the authority competent to

sanction eligible leave and leave without allowances.  Study leave under

Rule 99, Part I, can be sanctioned only by Government.

91.A      **Officers with a continuous officiating or temporary service of 5 years or

more may be granted in addition to any leave to which they are eligible for,

leave for undergoing Post-graduate Courses in the sphere of their duties

which are primarily of benefit to the State, such as Post-graduate Courses
for teachers, Engineers and Doctors.  The leave shall be granted only with

due regard to the usefulness of the higher studies to the public service.

SECTION  V

LEAVE  SALARY

92.         An officer on earned leave is entitled to leave salary equal to,-

                (i)    full (duty) pay i.e., pay admissible had he been on duty during the

period of leave;

                (ii)    dearness allowance applicable to the above  duty pay; and

                (iii)    such other compensatory allowances as are admissible under the rules

during the period of leave:

             † Provided that where an officer is promoted during the period he is on
earned leave the monetary benefit of promotion shall be given only from

the date on which he assumes charge of the post, if there is change of

duties.

                Effective from 1st April 1973.

*[Circular No. 46858/Rules-1/62/Fin., Dated 30/10/1962]

** [G O(P) No. 204/1976/Fin., Dated 15/07/1976]
† [G O(P) No. 452/1979/Fin., Dated  04/05/1979]

148

CHAP IX ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 92-93

  * Note.- See Explanation and Notes below Rule 93.

   This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st

April 1973.

93.         An officer on half pay leave or leave not due is entitled to leave salary equal

to,-

               (i)   half of duty pay, i e., half of the pay admissible had he been on duty

during the period of leave;

                  (ii)   dearness allowance applicable to the amount admissible under clause

(i) above:

             † Provided that where an officer is promoted during the period he is on half
pay leave the monetary benefit of promotion shall be given only from the date

on which the officer assumes charge of the post, if there is change of duties.

                 Effective from 1st April 1973.

   Exception.- A non-gazetted officer whose pay before proceeding on leave,
# does not exceed  ````` 18740 in the revised scale of pay ordered in G.O.
(P)  No.85/2011/Fin.,  dated  26th  February,  2011  shall  be  entitled  to

dearness allowance which would have been admissible had he been

on duty, which together with the leave salary so admissible, is subject

to a minimum of sixty-five percent of the pay and dearness allowance

while on duty.  The excess over the actual leave salary in such cases

shall be termed as special leave allowance. This shall be deemed to

have come into force with effect from 1st July 2009.

* [G O(P) No. 491/1975/Fin., Dated  24/10/1975]

† [G O(P) No. 452/1979/Fin., Dated  04/05/1979]

# [Substitution G O(P) No. 406/2013/Fin., Dated  27/08/2013]

149

CHAP IX ]

LEAVE

and

[ RULE 93

              (iii)   **Hill Tract  Allowance, House Rent Allowance and City Compensatory

Allowance admissible from time to time will be payable during periods  of

all leave with allowances, if the total period  of such leave at a time does

not exceed 180 days or if the actual duration of the leave exceeds 180 days

for the first 180 days of such leave.

                          **This shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 25th July, 1995

   Explanation.- For the purpose of Rule 92 and this rule, period of duty shall be
deemed to be the period of duty in a post during which the officer

would have drawn the pay in the time-scale of that post but for his

proceeding on leave.

              In the case of officiating appointments,  a certificate of continuance in the

same post but for leave should be furnished to the Audit Officer along with

the sanction noted in the Service Book and the bill claiming the leave salary.

   Note 1.- Special pay granted in lieu of higher time-scale of pay for additional

and/or higher responsibilities attached to a post may be drawn during

periods of leave if the officer would have continued in that post after

the expiry of leave. The officer who records certificate to the above

effect in the leave salary bill may do so only after proper verification.

The special pay sanctioned for specially arduous nature of work or for

work  in  addition  to  normal  duties  attached  to  his  post  or  charge

allowance will not be admissible during periods of leave unless the

officer discharges the work for which the special pay is sanctioned.

  *Note 2.-  [Omitted]

   This shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 25th July, 1995

[** Substitution,*Omitted G O(P) No.135/2002/Fin., Dated 14/03/2002]

150

CHAP IX ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 93-96

  Note 3.-The ‘Special Allowance’ sanctioned to the Police Personnel and

corresponding  categories  in  the  Fire  Force,  Prison,  Forest,  Excise

and Vigilance Departments shall be payable during periods of all kinds

of leave with allowances.  But the drawal of the allowance during periods
of leave shall be restricted to the first  # 180 days  of leave.

          This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect

from 25th July, 1995.

*94.        An officer on commuted  leave is entitled to leave salary equal to twice the
amount of the pay admissible under clause (i) of Rule 93  and allowances

applicable under clause (ii) and (iii) thereof to the pay so admissible.

              *This shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 25th July, 1995.

95.         An officer on leave without allowances is not entitled to any leave salary.

SECTION  VI

OVERSTAYAL

96.         In the case of an officer governed by these leave rules who remains absent

after the end of his leave, the period of such overstayal of leave is, unless

the leave is extended by the competent authority treated as follows:-

                      (i)    as half pay leave to the extent such leave is due, whether the overstayal

is supported by a medical certificate or not;

               †(ii)    leave without allowances to the extent of the period of half pay leave due

falls short of the period of overstayal.

                 The officer is not entitled to leave salary during such overstayal of leave not

covered by an extension of leave by competent authority.

[*, # Substitution G O(P) No. 135/2002/Fin., Dated 14/03/2003]

†[G O(P) No. 703/1964/Fin., Dated  01/10/1964]

151

CHAP IX ]

LEAVE

[ RULES 96-97

 Note .- Wilful absence from duty after the expiry of leave will be treated as

misbehaviour for the purpose of Rule 21, Part I.

96A.     * Where a Government servant not in permanent employ fails to resume duty

on the expiry of the maximum period of leave without allowances granted to

him or where such a Government servant who is granted a lesser amount of

leave without allowances than the maximum amount admissible remains absent

from duty for any period which together with the leave without allowances

granted exceeds the limit upto which he could have been granted such leave

under these rules, he shall, unless the Government, in view of the exceptional

circumstances of the case otherwise determines, be removed from service

after  following  the  procedure  laid  down  in  the  Kerala  Civil  Services

(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1960.

SECTION VII

SPECIAL  DISABILITY  LEAVE

97.!(1)   Subject to the conditions hereinafter specified, special disability leave may
be granted to an officer who is disabled by injury intentionally inflicted or

caused in, or in consequence of the due performance of his official duties or

in consequence of his official position.

                Effective from 6th March 1968.

       (2)   Such leave shall not be granted unless the disability manifested itself within

three  months  of  the  occurrence  to  which  it  is  attributed,  and  the  person

disabled  acted  with  due  promptitude  in  bringing  it  to  notice.    But  the

Government, if they are satisfied as to the cause of the disability, may permit

leave to be granted in cases where the disability manifested itself is more

than three months after the occurrence of its cause.

* [G O(P) No. 254/1970/Fin., Dated 27/04/1970]

! [G O(P) No. 481/1970/Fin., Dated  06/07/1970]

152

CHAP IX ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 97-98

     (3)  The period of leave granted shall be such as is certified by the medical
attendant of the officer to be necessary.  It shall not be extended except
on the certificate of the medical attendant of the officer and shall in no
case exceed 24 months.

       (4)    Such leave may be combined with leave of any other kind.

       (5)    Such leave may be granted more than once if the disability is aggravated or
reproduced in similar circumstances at a later date, but not more than 24
months of such leave shall be granted in consequence of any one disability.

        (6)    Such leave shall be counted as duty in calculating service for pension and shall

not be debited against the leave account.

       (7)    Leave salary during such leave shall be granted—

              (a)    for the first  four months of any period of such leave including a
period of such leave granted under clause (5) of this rule as under
Rule 92, and

                (b)    for the remaining period of any such leave, as under Rule 93.

      (8)   In the case of a person to whom the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923,
applies, the amount of leave salary payable under this rule shall be reduced
by the amount of compensation payable under section 4 (1) (d) of the said
Act.

98.         The application of the provisions of Rule 97 may be extended to an officer
who is disabled by injury accidentally incurred in *or in consequence of the
due  performance  of  his  official  duties  or  in  consequence  of  his  official
position, or by illness incurred in the performance of any particular duty
which has the effect of increasing his liability to illness or injury beyond the
ordinary risk attaching to the civil post which he holds.

                †Effective from 6th March 1968.

*[G O(P) No. 353/1976/Fin., Dated 19/11/1976]
† [G O(P) No. 481/1970/Fin., Dated 06/07/1970]

153

CHAP IX ]

LEAVE

[ RULES 98-100

               The grant of this concession is subject to the further conditions :-

             (1)   that the disability, if due to disease must be certified by the medical

attendant of the officer to be directly due to the performance  of the

particular duty;

            (2)   that, if the officer has contracted such disability during service,  it

must be, in the opinion of the Government, so exceptional in character,

or in the circumstances of its occurrence as to justify such unusual

treatment as the grant of this form of a leave; and

                (3)    that the period of absence recommended by the medical attendant of the

officer may be covered in part by leave under this rule and in part by

other leave, and that the amount of special disability leave granted on full

pay i.e., pay admissible had he been on duty during the period of leave

may be less than four months.

  # Note.- Disability leave is admissible to temporary officers also.

  This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st

April 1973.

99.         *[Omitted]

SECTION IX

MATERNITY  LEAVE

100.        A  competent authority may grant to a female officer, maternity leave on full

pay for a period of !180 days from the date of its commencement.

             *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from

24th September, 2009.

# [G O(P)No.  491/1975/Fin., Dated  24/10/1975]

*[Omitted G O(P) No.65/2007/Fin., Dated 19/02/2007]
![Substitution G O(P) No. 216/2012/Fin., Dated 11/04/2012]

154

CHAP IX ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 100

  Note 1.- Maternity leave is also admissible to temporary female officers under

this rule.

  †Note 2.- [Deleted]

  **Note 3.-  The female candidates undergoing pre-appointment stipendiary
training  may  be  allowed  leave  for  maternity  purpose  to  the  extent
envisaged  under  this  rule  on  full  rate  of  stipend  admissible.    The
benefit of this leave may also be granted in the case of miscarriage/
abortion subject to the same conditions as laid in Rule 101 below.

   This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect  from 1st

August 1973.

  Note 4.-  # Maternity leave under this rule and Rule 101 shall be admissible to
provisional female recruits continuing in service *in a single department
beyond  one  year  provided  they  would  continue  in  service  but  for
proceeding on such leave.

  This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from the

2nd July 1969.

  *This amendement shall come into force w.e.f. 21st August, 2000.

  @Note 5. – Female recruits through Public Service Commission who join
duty within !180 days from their date of delivery (otherwise than on
account of miscarriage) shall, on joining, be granted from the next day
the balance portion of maternity leave admissible as on the date of
joining duty, subject to the following condictions:

†[G O(P) No. 96/1981/Fin., Dated  05/02/1981]
**[G O(P) No. 308/1974/Fin., Dated 20/09/1974]
# [G O(P) No. 825/1980/Fin., Dated 31/10/1980]
*[G O(P) No. 521/2003/Fin., Dated  06/10/2003]
@ [Insertion G O(P) No. 59/2006/Fin., Dated  06/02/2006]
![Substitution G O(P) No. 216/2012/Fin., Dated 11/04/2012 ( with effect from 24/09/2009)]

155

CHAP IX ]

LEAVE

[ RULES 100-101

 (a)     Holidays/vacation falling immediately after the date of joining

service cannot be prefixed to the leave.

 (b)    A certificate from the medical officer who attended the delivery
showing the date of delivery along with the medical certificate of
health as prescribed in Rule 13, Part I of Kerala Service Rules
should be produced.

              This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force at once.

 !Note 6.- Female Officers on maternity leave who get appointment in another
Department or in the same Department by direct recruitment or by
transfer or by promotion shall be allowed to avail the balance portion
of maternity leave from the next day of  her joining duty in the new post
or department subject to the following conditions:

 (a)     The maximum period of leave admissible under this rule including
intervening holidays and vacation, in both the departments or
posts together, shall be 180 days.

(b)    The proceedings or order of the previous department from which
the maternity leave was avalied should be produced in the new
office or department to avail the second spell of maternity leave.

(c)    A certificate to the effect that such premature cancellation of
maternity  leave  and  rejoining  is  for  satisfying  the
administrative or technical requirement, in order to join duty
in another department or post shall be produced and the same
shall be recorded in the service register.

   Ruling

          †The  expression  ‘full  pay’  occurring  in  the  above  rule  means  pay  as

admissible to an officer under Rule 92, Part I, Kerala Service Rules.

101.        Leave under Rule 100 above may also  be granted to female officers in cases
of miscarriage including abortion subject to the condition that the leave does

! [Insertion G O(P) No. 243/2012/Fin., Dated  27/04/2012  (with effect from 30/12/2009)]
†[G O(P) No. 413/1990/Fin., Dated 07/08/1990]

156

CHAP IX ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 101-102A

not exceed six weeks and application for the leave is supported by a certificate
from the medical attendant.

101.A   # Leave under Rule 100 may also be granted to female officers in cases of
hysterectomy  subject  to  the  condition  that  the  leave  does  not  exceed  45
days and application for the leave is supported by a certificate from the
medical attendent.

102.      Maternity leave may be combined with leave of any other kind but leave
applied for in continuation of the former may be granted only if the request
be supported by a medical certificate:

              **Provided that no medical certificate shall be necessary for grant of any leave for a

period not exceeding sixty days in continuation of maternity leave.

             **Effective from 5th June 1978.

  Note.- Regular leave in continuation of maternity leave may also be granted
to  a  female  officer  on  her  producing  a  medical  certificate  to  the
effect  that  the  new  born  baby  requires  personal  attention  of  the
mother  and  her  presence  by  the  side  of  the  baby  is  absolutely
necessary.

  Explanation.—The kinds of leave coming under regular leave mentioned in
the Note are Earned Leave, Half  Pay Leave, Leave Not Due and Leave
Without Allowances only

! SECTION IX A

CHILD  ADOPTION  LEAVE

102.A     The competent authority may grant Child Adoption Leave for a period up to
†180 days to female State Government Employees who are adoptive mothers

# [Insertion G O(P) No. 216/2012/Fin., Dated 11/04/2012 (with effect from 01/04/2009)]
*[G O(P) No. 428/1979/Fin., Dated  24/04/1979]

** [G O(P) No. 428/1979/Fin., Dated 24/04/1979]
! [Insertion G O(P) No.76/2010/Fin., Dated 18/03/2010 (with effect from 31/08/2007)]
†[Substitution G O(P) No. 244/2012/Fin., Dated  27/04/2012 (with effect from 06/02/2010)]

157

CHAP IX ]

LEAVE

[ RULES 102A-102B

with fewer than two surviving children, from the date of legal adoption of a

child up to one year of age with full pay and allowances as admissible under

rule 92, part 1 Kerala Service Rules.

              The grant of leave is subject to the further conditions:-

                  (a)    that the leave will be allowed to be combined with other kinds of leave

except leave  without allowances under Appendix XII A/XII B/XII C

Part 1 Kerala Service Rules.

                (b)    that the regular leave (including leave not due and commuted leave) for a
period up to one year reduced by the age of the adopted child on the date

of legal adoption without taking into account the period of child adoption

leave, applied for in continuation of Child Adoption Leave will be granted

if the request is supported by Medical Certificate to the effect that the

adopted child requires personal attention of the mother and her presence

by the side of the baby is absolutely necessary:

             Provided that no Medical Certificate shall be necessary for grant of any leave for a

period not exceeding sixty days in continuation  of Child Adoption Leave.

               (c)   that such leave will not be debited against the leave account, but its

details shall be entered in the Service Book of the employee.

* SECTION  IX B

PATERNITY  LEAVE

102 B.    The competent authority may grant paternity leave for a period up to 10 days
to male State Government Employees during the confinement of his wife for

two deliveries, with full pay and allowances as admissible under rule 92 of

Part I, Kerala Service Rules. The grant of such leave shall be subject to the

following further conditions, namely:-

*[Insertion G O(P) No. 27/2013/Fin., Dated  15/01/2013 (with effect from 26/02/2011)]

158

CHAP IX ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 102B-103

                (a)     that the leave will be granted for a period up to 10 days before or within

three months after the date of delivery.

              (b)      that the leave will be granted only if the request for leave is supported by
a certificate from the Medical Officer showing either the expected date of
delivery or the exact date of delivery , depending on whether the leave
commences before or after the delivery, as the case may be.

                  (c)     that the leave will be allowed to be combined with other kinds of leave
except leave without allowance under Appendix XII A/XII B/ XII C,
Part I, Kerala Service Rules.

             (d)   that such leave will not be debited against the leave account but its

details shall be entered in the Service Book of the employee.

SECTION X

HOSPITAL  LEAVE

103.        A competent authority may grant hospital leave to officers of the following
classes while under medical treatment for illness or injury, if such illness or
injury is directly due to risks incurred in the course of their official duties.—

                (a)   * Police Officers of rank not higher than that of Head Constable and
Fire Service Personnel of and below the rank of Leading Fireman,
including Driver, Mechanics and Fireman Drivers.

                (b)    Forest subordinates, other than clerks in receipt of pay not exceeding

! ````` 14620.

                      This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect

from 1st July 2009.

                  (c)    Head warders or warders, male or female,  of jails or lunatic asylums and

Matrons of the Jails Department.

*[G O(P) No. 132/2002/Fin., Dated  14/03/2002]
![Substitution G O(P) No. 406/2013/Fin., Dated 27/08/2013 (with effect from 01/07/2009)]

159

CHAP IX ]

LEAVE

[ RULES 103-104

               (d)    Subordinates employed in Government Laboratories.

                  (e)    Subordinates  of  other  departments  employed  in  the  working  of

Government machinery.

                (f)    Last grade employees of all departments.

               (g)    Guards and Preventive Officers of the Excise Department, and

              !(h)    Government Servants drawing a pay of  ` ` ` ` ` 120 or less per mensem who

serve as Home Guard Volunteer.

   † Note 1.- Hospital leave will be granted only on production by the employee
concerned of a medical certificate from his  authorised medical attendant
to the effect that the leave recommended is necessary to effect a cure
and a certificate from his head of office to the effect that the illness or
injury was directly due to risk incurred in the course of official duties.

   Note 2.- Hospital leave is admissible to temporary employees also under this

rule.

  ! Note 3.- Hospital leave will be granted to the officers coming under clause
(h) above only in cases of injuries sustained while on duty as Home
Guard Volunteers and only if the application is supported by a certificate
from the Commandant General, Home Guards, to the effect that the
injury was sustained by the employee while on active duty as a Home
Guard Volunteer.  This will be in addition to the certificate prescribed in
Note 1 above.

104.       **Hospital leave may be granted for such period as the authority granting it
may consider necessary, on leave salary (1) equal to leave salary while on
earned leave, for the first 120 days of any period of such leave; and (2) equal
to leave salary during half pay leave, for the remaining period of any such
leave.  In the case of a person to whom the Workmen’s Compensation Act,

![G O(P) No. 143/1968/Fin., Dated  16/04/1968]
†[G O(P) No. 308/1985/Fin., Dated 29/05/1985]
**[G O(P) No. 320/1975/Fin., Dated 17/07/1975]

160

CHAP IX ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 104-106

1923, applies, the amount of leave salary payable under this rule shall be
reduced by the amount of compensation payable under section 4 (1) (d) of
the said Act.

105.      *[Omitted]

106.        Hospital leave is not debited against the leave account and may be combined

with any other leave which may be admissible.

              Government Decision

            A  register in the form, given below will be maintained by all Heads of
Departments  and  offices  showing  the  various  kinds  of  special  leave
#(e.g., special disability leave, hospital leave, maternity leave, leave not
due, commuted leave, paternity leave, child adoption leave etc.) granted
to Government  servants from time to time to facilitate the check by the
local audit parties as to whether the conditions for the grant of the leave
have been fulfilled in individual cases, by the authorities competent to
sanction the leave.

† Register for recording particulars of special kinds of leave e.g., maternity
leave, special disability leave, hospital leave, leave not due, etc.

Name and
designation
of the officer

Nature
of leave

Period

Particulars
of
sanction

Initials of
authority
competent
to  attest
entries in
the Service
Book

Remarks

From To No. Date

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

*[G O(P) No. 522/1967/Fin., Dated  04/12/1967]
†[G O(P) No. 337/1960/Fin., Dated  02/07/1960]
# [Government Decision No. 1/2014 vide  G O(P) No. 20/14/Fin., Dated  15/01/2014]

161

CHAP IX ]

LEAVE

SECTION XI

[ RULES 107-110

LEAVE  TO  PART-TIME  OFFICERS

107.      A Law Officer, if his pay is fixed at a definite rate but his whole time is not

retained for the service of Government may be granted leave as follows:

               (a)    Leave on full pay during vacation of the Court within whose jurisdiction

he serves,provided that no extra expense is hereby caused to Government.

Such leave will be counted as duty.

               (b)   Leave on half pay for not more than three months once only in his

service after three years of duty.

                   (c)   On medical certificate, leave on half-pay upto a maximum of six months

at any one time, provided that two years of duty must intervene between

any two periods of leave on medical certificate.

                (d)   On the conditions prescribed in Rule 88 leave without allowances.

108.        Leave under any one of the clauses of Rule 107 may be combined with leave

under any other clause.

109.       An officer remunerated by honoraria may be granted leave on the terms laid

down in Rules 107 and 108 provided that he makes satisfactory arrangements

for  the  performance  of  his  duties,  that  no  extra  expense  is  caused  to

Government and that during leave of the kind contemplated by clause (b) of

Rule 107 the whole of the honoraria is paid to the person who officiates in his

post.

110.       Leave of the following kinds may be granted to an apprentice:-

                (a)   On medical certificate, leave on leave salary equivalent to half-pay for a

period not exceeding one month in any year of apprenticeship.

                (b)   Leave without allowances under Rule 88.

162

CHAP IX ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 110A-110D

SECTION XI A

LEAVE  TO  RADIATION  WORKERS

110 A.  *Rules for the grant of leave to radiation workers in the State Medical

Service are given in Appendix XII.

SECTION XI  B

LEAVE  FOR  TAKING  UP  EMPLOYMENT  ABROAD  OR
WITHIN  INDIA

110 B.     **Rules for the grant of leave without  allowances for taking  up employment

abroad or within India are given in Appendix XII A.

              This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 16th

December, 1983.

   SECTION XI C

LEAVE  FOR  THE  PURPOSE  OF  STUDY  FOR  THOS E INELIGIBLE  FOR
LEAVE  UNDER  RULE  88  OR  RULE  91  OF  PART  I

110 C.    †Rules for the grant of leave for study purpose for those ineligible for leave

under Rule 88 or Rule 91of Part I are given in Appendix XII B.

              This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 18th

September 1984.

SECTION XI D

LEAVE  FOR  JOINING  SPOUSE

110 D.   # Rule for the grant of leave without allowances for the purpose of joining

spouse are given in Appendix XIIC.

*[G O(P) No. 92/1968/Fin., Dated 06/03/1968]

**[G O(P) No. 953/1986/Fin., Dated 27/12/1986]

†[G O(P) No.654/1995/Fin., Dated 10/10/1995]
# [G O(P) No.1002/1997/Fin., Dated  06/11/1997]

163

CHAP IX ]

LEAVE

[ RULES 110D-116

               This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 12th

April 1984.

SECTION XII

CASUAL  LEAVE

111.        Rules regarding Casual Leave to Officers are given in Appendix VII.

SECTION XIII

PROCEDURE  RELATING  TO  LEAVE

112.       A leave account shall be maintained for each officer.

   Note.- Leave account of a Gazetted Officer will be maintained by the Audit

Officer.  The leave account of a non-gazetted officer will be maintained

by the Head of the Office in which he is employed.

113.         An application for leave or an extension of leave must be made to the authority

competent to grant such leave or extension in Form No. 13.

114.      *Leave to officers on foreign service in India will be sanctioned by the

foreign employer.

115.         Medical officers must not recommend the grant of leave in any case in which

there appears to be no reasonable prospect that the officer concerned will

never be fit to resume his duties.  In such cases the opinion that the officer

is permanently unfit for Government service should be recorded in the Medical

Certificate.

116.        Every certificate of a medical committee or a medical officer  recommending

the grant of leave to an officer must contain a proviso that no recommendation

contained in it shall be evidence of a claim to any leave not admissible to the

officer under the terms of his contract or of the rules to which he is subject.

* [G O(P) No. 228/1976/Fin., Dated  02/08/1976]

164

CHAP IX ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 117

117.         Before an officer can be granted leave or an extension of leave on medical
certificate, he must obtain a certificate in the following form from such
medical authority as the Government may by general or special order
prescribe.

*  Medical    Certificate

……………………….

(Signature  of  the  applicant)

                  I  (Name)  ……………………………………  after  careful  personal
examination of the case hereby certify that (Name and official address)
…………………. whose signature is given above, is suffering from
…………………….. and that I consider that a period of absence from
duty of ………………………… with effect from ……………………. is
absolutely necessary for the restoration of his/her health.

Signature of Medical Officer…………………..

Registration No. ……………………………….

Part of Registration ……….…………………...

System of Medicine ….………………………..

  Note 1.-The possession of  a certificate as prescribed in this rule does not in

itself confer upon the officer concerned any right to leave.

  Note 2.-The nature and probable duration of the illness should be specified.

  Note 3.-This form should be adhered to as closely as possible, and should be
filled  in  after  the  signature  of  the  applicant  has  been  taken.    The
certifying officer is not at liberty to certify that the applicant requires a
change to (or from) a particular locality, or that he is not fit to proceed
to a particular locality.  Such certificate should only be given at the
explicit desire of the administrative authority concerned, to whom it is

*[G O(P) No. 430/1973/Fin., Dated  20/11/1973]

165

CHAP IX ]

LEAVE

[ RULE 117

open to desire when an application on such grounds has been made to
him, whether the applicant should go before a Medical Board to decide
the question of his fitness for service.

  Note 4.-No recommendation contained in this certificate shall be evidence of
a claim to any leave not admissible to the officer under the terms of his
contract or of the rules to which he is subject.

  Note 5.-Reciprocal arrangements have been entered into with the Mysore
Government to the effect that officers including police personnel of
one State while staying in the other will be examined free of cost by a
Medical Board or a Medical Officer employed under the Government
of the State concerned for purposes of grant or extension of leave and
fitness to resume duty on the expiry of leave.  A medical requisition
from  the  competent  authority  will  be  required  before  the  medical
examination is conducted.

               Government Decision

          *  For  the  purpose  of  this  rule,  the  Medical  Certificates  issued  by  the
following medical authorities will be accepted provided that the certificates
are in accordance with the provisions of the above rule :-

                    1.   Medical Officers of Government not below the rank of an Assistant

Surgeon.

                   2.    Private Medical Practitioners of Modern Medicine registered in Part A

of the register of Modern Medicines.

                     3.    Ayurveda Physicians and Homeopathic Doctors attached to Government

Hospitals and Dispensaries.

                     4.    Private Practitioners of Indigenous Medicines registered in Class A of the

Register of Indigenous  Medicines; and

*[G O(P) No. 512/1961/Fin., Dated  27/12/1961]

166

CHAP IX ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 117-118

                     5.    Private Homeopathic Practitioners registered in Class A of the Register

of Homeopathic Medicines.

              Notwithstanding anything contained herein, in the case of applications

for ‘leave not due’ under Rule 85, Part I, Kerala Service Rules, Medical

Certificate granted by the authorities mentioned in items 1 and 3 alone

shall be accepted.

*118.(a)  In the case of certificate issued by an Assistant Surgeon, Ayurvedic Physician

or Homeopathic Doctor attached to a Government Hospital or Dispensary or
a private Practitioner of  **Modern, Indigenous or Homeopathic Medicine,

the  authority  competent  to  sanction  leave  may  at  its  discretion,  secure  a

second medical opinion by requesting a Civil Surgeon, District Indigenous
Medical Officer or the Chief Medical Officer, † Department of Homeopathy
as the case may be, to have the applicant medically examined.  Should it

decide to do so, it must arrange for the second examination to be made on

the earliest possible date after the date on which the first medical opinion

was given.

      (b)  It shall be the duty of the Civil Surgeon, the District Indigenous Medical
Officer or the Chief Medical Officer, # Department of Homeopathy as the case
may be, to express an opinion, both as regards the facts of the illness and as

regards the necessity for the amount of leave recommended.  For this purpose,

he may require the applicant to appear either before himself or before a Medical

Officer nominated by him.

       (c)  If the authority competent to sanction leave has doubts about the second

medical opinion also he may refer the case to the Medical Board, constituted

by the Director of Health Services on requisition.

*[G O(P) No. 118/1965/Fin., Dated  03/04/1965]

**[G O(P) No. 405/1976/Fin., Dated  28/12/1976]

†, # [G O(P) No. 192/1976/Fin., Dated  08/07/1976]

167

CHAP IX ]

LEAVE

[ RULES 118A-121

118.A    When the competent authority has genuine doubts about the fitness of an

officer, it may refer him to a single man Medical Board or the standing Medical

Board, for expert medical opinion.  If the medical report is that the officer is

not physically fit or mentally sound, the officer may be deemed to have

entered on eligible leave from the date of the medical report, even if the

officer does not put in a leave application.  If he does not produce a certificate

from the Medical Board that he is physically fit or mentally sound and has

been cured of his illness within a period of five years from the date on which

he was deemed to have entered on leave, he may be deemed to have retired
on invalid pension.  If the actual date of retirement of the officer falls within

this period of five years he shall retire on that date.

 # Note .- Eligible leave means leave due and admissible to an officer and the

order of sanctioning this leave will be earned leave and half-pay leave

*or commuted leave.  If there is no eligible leave, leave without allowance

will be granted to regularise the period of absence.

119.          In support of an application for leave, or for an extension of leave, on medical

certificate, from an officer of the last grade, the authority competent to grant

the leave may accept such certificate as it may deem sufficient.

120.     No leave may be granted to a Gazetted Officer until a report as to the

admissibility of the leave has been obtained from the audit officer.

121.       In cases where all applications for leave cannot, in the interest of the public

service, be granted, an authority competent to grant leave should, in deciding
which  application  should  be  granted,  take  into  account  the  following
considerations :-

                (a)   The officer who can, for the time being , best be spared.

                (b)   The amount of leave due to the various applicants.

# [G O(P) No. 233/1976/Fin., Dated 04/08/1976]
*[G O(P) No. 839/1992/Fin., Dated  04/11/1992]

168

CHAP IX ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 121-122

              (c)   The amount and character of the service rendered by each applicant

since he last returned from leave.

              (d)   The fact that any such applicant was compulsorily recalled from his last

leave.

                   (e)     The fact that any such applicant has been refused leave in public interest.

122. (i)  When a medical authority has reported that there is no reasonable prospect
that a particular officer will ever be fit to return to duty, leave should not
necessarily be refused to such officer.  It may be granted, if due, by a competent
authority on the following  conditions:-

                   (a)    If the medical authority  is unable to say with certainty that the officer
will never again be fit for service, leave not exceeding twelve months in
all may be granted.  Such leave should not be extended without further
reference to a Medical Board.

             (b)   If an officer is declared by a medical authority to be completely and
permanently incapacitated for further service, leave or an extension of
leave may be granted to him after the  report of the medical authority
has been received, provided that the amount of leave as debited against
the leave account together with any period of duty beyond the date of
the medical authority’s report does not exceed six months.

     (ii)  An officer who is declared by a medical authority to be completely and

permanently incapacitated for further service shall—

                   (a)    If he is on duty, be invalidated from service from the date of relief of his
duties, which should be arranged without delay on receipt of the report
of the medical authority.  If, however, he is granted leave under sub-rule
(i) above he shall be invalidated from service on  the expiry of such
leave; and

              (b)  if he is already on leave, he is invalidated from service on the
expiry of that leave or extension of leave, if any, granted to him
under sub-rule (i).

169

CHAP IX ]

LEAVE

[ RULES 123-124

123.       Leave shall not be granted to an officer whom a competent authority has

decided  to  dismiss,  remove  or  compulsorily  retire  from  Government

service.

124.       An officer returning from leave is not entitled, in the absence of specific

orders to that effect, to resume as a matter of course, the post which he

held before going on leave.  He must report his return to duty and await

orders.

               Government Decision No. 1

                  *Whenever  an  order  sanctioning  leave  to  an  officer  is  issued  and

communicated, it should contain directions as to where the officer should

rejoin duty on the expiry of the leave, any change that may take place in

the  position  of  the  officer  during  the  period    of  leave  being  also

communicated  to  the  authorities  concerned  under  intimation  to  the

Accountant General wherever necessary.

               Government Decision No. 2

           †An officer on leave should intimate sufficiently early his intention of
rejoining duty after leave so as to avoid any possible delay in the issue

of posting orders in time.

*[Circular No. Fin., R.A. 33409/1960, Dated 08/08/1960]

†[G O(P) No. 558/1962/Fin., Dated 12/11/1962]

170

CHAP X ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 125

CHAPTER  X

JOINING TIME

125.       Joining time may be granted to an officer to enable him—

                (a)    to join a new post to which he is appointed while on duty in his old

post;  or

                (b)   to join a new post,-

  (i)    on return from earned leave;

 (ii)   When he has not had sufficient notice of his appointment to the

new post, on return from leave other than that specified in Sub-

clause (i)

   Note 1.- An officer deputed for training will be allowed for the onward and

return  journeys,  the  time  actually  required  for  the  journeys,  by  the

usual    mode  of  conveyance,  between  the  place  of  training  and  the

station from/to which he proceeds, and the time so taken will be treated

as part of deputation period for training.

   Note 2.- Probationers and approved probationers in one service (including

other officiating officers for whom no probation has been prescribed)

when appointed to the same or another service by direct recruitment

shall be allowed the minimum joining time (i.e., actual journey time) and

transit pay, provided that the posts held by them prior to transfer or

the posts to which they are appointed remain vacant during the period.

They shall not, however, be allowed Travelling Allowance.

              [Effective from 22nd August 1960]

               Ruling No. 1

Joining time under Rule 125 (b) (i), Part I, Kerala Service Rules, will be

admissible only in cases where an officer has proceeded on and has returned

171

CHAP X ]

JOINING TIME

[ RULES 125-126A

from earned leave proper and is posted to join a new post.  In all other cases,

it should be regulated under sub-clause (b) (ii) ibid.

          Ruling No. 2

              A gazetted officer deputed for training should relinquish charge of his post

and prepare a charge report even if no officiating arrangement is made in his

place.  He should also intimate to the Audit Officer concerned, through the

Training Institute/Officer, etc., the date and hour of reporting for training

and on relief on the completion of training.

               Government Decision

            *Retired officers re-employed in Government service will be treated on  par

with  provisional hands appointed under General Rule 9 (a) (i) of the Kerala

State and Subordinate Services Rules, 1958 for purposes of joining time and

only the actual journey time allowed as joining time.

126.         Not more than one day is allowed to an officer in order to join a new post when

the  appointment  to  such  post  does  not  necessarily  involve  a  change  of

residence from one station to another.  A holiday or Sunday counts as a day

for the purpose of this rule.  No joining time is admissible in cases where the

change of post does not involve an actual change of office.

   #Note.- A transfer shall be held to involve a change of station only if

the  distance  between  the  two  places  is  not  less  than  eight

kilometres.

126A.   When holiday(s) follow(s) joining time, the normal joining time may be

deemed to have been extended to cover such holiday(s).

*[G O(Ms) No. 11/1967/PD., Dated  17/01/1967]
# [G O(P) No. 48/1966/Fin., Dated 10/02/1966]

172

CHAP X ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 126A-127

              Ruling

                  *When officers are transferred while on leave, joining time need be reckoned

only from the date following the holiday(s), if any, suffixed to leave with the

permission of the leave sanctioning authority unless otherwise directed in

the transfer order.

127.       The joining time of an officer, in cases involving a transfer from one station to

another, is subject to a maximum of 30 days.  Six days are allowed for preparation

and, in addition, a period to cover the actual journey calculated as follows: -

             Actual time occupied in
the journey

One day for each or any

longer time actually

occupied in the journey.

               (a)   An officer is allowed—

 (i)     For the portion of

the 

journey

which  he  travels

by aircraft

(ii)    For the portion of

the 

journey

which  he  travels

or might travel:

                 By railway                        500 kilometres

               By ocean steamer        350 kilometres

                 By river steamer          150 kilometres

                  By motor vehicles       150 Kilometres

                Or by conveyance

plying for public hire
in any other way           25 kilometres

*[G O(P) No. 38/1973/Fin., Dated  05/02/1973]

173

 
 
CHAP X ]

JOINING TIME

[ RULE 127

(b)     (i)     For purposes of journey by air under clause (a) (i), a part of a day

should be treated as one day.

(ii)    A day is also allowed for any fractional portion of any distance

prescribed in clause (a) (ii).

                   (c)     When part of the journey is by steamer, the limit of six days for preparation

may be extended to cover any period unavoidably spent in awaiting the

departure of the steamer.

             (d)    Travel by road not exceeding eight kilometres to or from a railway
station or steamer ghat at the beginning or end of journey does not

count for joining time.

                (e)    A Sunday does not count as a day for the purpose of the calculations

in this rule, but Sundays are included in the maximum period of 30

days.

    Exception  1.-  The  authority  sanctioning  the  transfer  may,  in  special

circumstances, reduce the period of joining time admissible under this

rule.

   Exception 2.- In the case of officers who are entrusted with the custody

of  stores,  a  period  of  not  more  than  ten  days  and  in  the  case  of

officers  in  charge  of  Timber  Depots  of  the  Forest  Department  a

period of not more than one week will be allowed for transfer of

charge of check conjointly stores and other materials, the minimum

time actually required in each case alone being, however, utilised

for the purpose.

  Exception 3.- A period of not more than one week will be allowed to Forest

Guards for transfer of charge and join perambulation of the beats, the

minimum time actually required alone being, however, utilised  for the

purpose.  This period will be treated as an extension of joining time in

respect of the relieving officer.

174

CHAP X ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 128-130

128.          Except in the case of a journey performed by air, by whatever route an officer
actually travels, his joining time shall, unless a competent authority for special
reasons  otherwise  orders,  be  calculated  by  the  route  which  travellers
ordinarily use.

               Government Decision

                 * Except in cases of journeys performed by air, which will be covered by the
provisions in sub-rule (a) of Rule 127, the entitlement to joining time of a
Government  servant,  in  cases  where  his  old  headquarters  and  new
headquarters are connected by railway, should be calculated as admissible
for a journey by railway.

129.         If an officer is authorised to make over charge of a post elsewhere than at its
headquarters, his joining time shall be calculated from the place at which he
makes over charge.

130.      If an officer is appointed to a new post while in transit from one post to
another, his joining time begins on the day following that on which he receives
the order of appointment.

   Note. - A second period of 6 days for preparation should not be allowed in
calculating the joining time of an officer who is appointed to a new
post, while in transit from one post to another.

               Government Decision

             † In the case of a Government servant who is transferred from one post to
another but whose transfer is subsequently cancelled after he has handed
over charge of his old post but before he could take charge of the new post,
the period intervening between the date of handing over charge of the old
post and taking over the same later on account of cancellation of transfer
orders, should be treated as joining time, subject to the provisions of Rule
130 and the Note thereunder.

* [G O(P) No. 52/1966/Fin., Dated 14/02/1966]
† [G O(P) No. 461/1968/Fin., Dated 24/08/1968]

175

CHAP X ]

JOINING TIME

[ RULES 131-134

131.        If a Government servant takes leave while in transit from one post to another,
the period which has elapsed since he handed over charge of his old post
must be included in his leave.  On the expiry of the leave, the Government
servant may be allowed normal joining time.

132.       If an officer is appointed to a new post while on earned leave he is entitled to
joining time  calculated  from his old station in addition to the earned leave.
Should the officer join the new appointment before the expiry of leave plus
joining time admissible, the period short taken should be considered as leave
not enjoyed and a corresponding portion of the leave sanctioned should be
cancelled without any reference  to the authority which granted the leave.
When  vacation or holidays immediately preceding vacation begin during or
immediately after  the expiry of joining time admissible to an officer or when
an officer is transferred during  vacation, he may be allowed to join at the end
of the vacation.

133.      The Government  may in any case extend the joining time admissible under
these rules, provided that the general spirit of the rules, is observed.

134.      Within the prescribed maximum of 30 days, the Government may, on such
conditions as it thinks fit, grant to an officer a longer period of joining time
than is admissible under the rules in the following circumstances:-

                     (a)   When the officer has been unable to use the ordinary mode of travelling
or, notwithstanding due diligence on his part, has spent  more time on
the journey than is allowed by the rules; or

                   (b)   When such extension is considered necessary for the public convenience
or for the saving of such public expenditure as is caused by unnecessary
or purely formal transfers; or

                  (c)   When the rules have in any particular case operated harshly; as for
example, when an officer has, though no fault on his part missed a
steamer or fallen sick on the journey.

176

CHAP X ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 135-137

135.     When an officer under the administrative control of the Government is
transferred to the control of another Government which has made rules
prescribing amounts of joining time, his joining time for the journey to
join his post under the Government, and for the return journey will be
governed by those rules.

136.       *A Government servant on joining time shall be regarded as on duty during
that period and shall be entitled to joining time pay equal to the pay which
was drawn before relinquishment  of charge in the old post.  He shall also be
entitled to Dearness Allowance, if any, appropriate to the joining time pay.  In
addition,  he  can  also  draw  compensatory  allowances,  and  house  rent
allowance as applicable to the old station from which he was transferred.  He
shall  not  be  allowed  conveyance  allowance  or  Permanent  Travelling
Allowance.

  Note.- An Officer on transfer is not entitled for joining time unless his transfer
is made in the public interest.  However, in cases of transfers on request,
an officer shall be paid joining time pay and allowances at the rate
admissible under this rule for the period spent in travelling to join the
new post and if he could not take charge on the new post on the day on
which he is to join consequent on that day being declared a holiday,
then, for that day also.

  Explanation.-There is no objection to an officer being granted regular leave
by the competent authority under the leave rules applicable to him
even if the transfer is at his own request to cover the period of handing
over charge at an old station and before taking over charge at another
if the officer applied for it and the competent authority is willing to
grant such leave.

137.       An officer who does not join his post within his joining time, is entitled to no
pay or leave salary after the end of the joining time.  Wilful absence from duty

*[G O(P) No.1010/1987/Fin., Dated  27/11/1987]

177

CHAP X ]

JOINING TIME

[ RULES 137-138

after the expiry of joining time may be treated as misbehavior for the purpose

of Rule 21.

              Government Decision

             The period of overstayal of joining time of an officer may be regularised by

granting eligible leave under Rule 131,  Part I,  Kerala Service Rules and the

Joining time pay regulated under Rule 136 (b) ibid

138.      A  person,  in  employment  other  than  Government  service  or  on  leave

granted  from  such  employment,  if  in  the  interest  of  Government,  is

appointed  to  a  post  under  the  Government  may,  at  the  discretion  of

Government,  be  treated  as  on  joining  time  while  he  prepares  for  and

makes  the  journey  to  join  the  post  under  Government    and  while  he

prepares  for  and  makes  the  journey  on  reversion  from  the  post  under

Government to return to his original employment.  During such joining

time he shall receive pay equal to the pay, or in the case of joining time

immediately following  leave granted from the private employment, to the

leave salary paid to him by his private employer prior to appointment to

Government service, or pay equal to the pay of the post in Government

service, whichever is less.

178

CHAP XI ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 139-140

CHAPTER  XI

FOREIGN SERVICE

139.       The rules, in this chapter apply to those officers only who are transferred to

foreign  service  after  these  rules  come  into  force.    Officers  transferred

previously will remain subject to the rules in force at the time of transfer.

               Government Decision

                  *In  cases  where  the  deputation  of  an  officer  to  foreign  service  was
sanctioned on a date prior to 1st November 1959 and the terms originally
fixed extend beyond 1st November 1959, no change in the terms need be
made  even  if  the  officer  has  opted  to  the  Kerala  Service  Rules,  but
extension of the period beginning from or after 1st November 1959 should
conform to the provisions in the Kerala Service Rules, provided the officer

concerned has opted to the Kerala Service Rules, the extension of the

term being treated as a fresh case of deputation.

†140.(a)  No officer may be transferred to foreign service against his will:

Provided that this sub-rule shall not apply to the transfer of an officer to the

service  of  a  body,  incorporated  or  not,  which  is  wholly  or  substantially

owned or controlled by the Government.

        (b)   A transfer to foreign service requires the sanction of the Government.

    # (c)   The period of deputation to foreign service shall be initially for one year
and may be extended year by year up to a continuous period of five years

in the aggregate. The officer on foreign service shall be relieved of his

duties on the date of expiry of the sanctioned period unless the competent

authority has, with requisite approval, extended the period of deputation,

*[Circular No. 66494/RA3/61/Fin., Dated 14/10/1961]

†[G O(P) No. 254/1970/Fin., Dated  27/04/1970]
# [Insertion G O(P).No. 45/2013/Fin., Dated  22/01/2013(with effect from 22/01/2013)]

179

CHAP XI ]

FOREIGN SERVICE

[ RULES 140-141

in  writing,  prior  to  the  date  of  its  expiry.  In    the  event  of  the  officer

overstaying  he  shall  be  liable  to  disciplinary  action  and  the  period  of

overstay shall not be counted for the purpose of pension and that any

increment  due  during  the  period  of  overstay  shall  be  deferred  with

cumulative effect, till the date on which the officer rejoins his parent

cadre. No ex post facto approval for  regularization of overstay on foreign

service shall be allowed. The officer shall be precluded from drawing pay

and allowances from the date on which the sanctioned term of foreign

service expires:

             Provided that the period of leave, if any, taken by an officer, as per

rules  applicable  to  him,  on  the  conclusion  of  foreign  service  and

before joining his post shall not be considered as an overstay under

this sub-rule.

             The provisions of this sub-rule shall mutatis mutandis apply to an officer on

deputation  from  one  service  to  another  or  from  one  Department  to  another

within the same service.

              *No officer shall normally be allowed to remain on deputation to foreign

service for more than five years continuously.  Provisions of Rule 24 will

apply to an officer who continues in foreign service for more than five

years at a time.

               * Effective from 17th December 1976.

141.       A transfer to the foreign service is not admissible unless –

            (a)   the duties to be performed after the transfer are  such as should; for

public reasons, be rendered by an officer of Government, and

                 (b)    the officer transferred holds, at the time of transfer, a permanent  or

temporary appointment  paid from the General Revenues or holds a

* [G O(P) No. 254/1970/Fin., Dated  27/04/1970]

180

CHAP XI ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 141-144

lien on such an appointment or would hold a lien on such a  post
had his lien not been suspended.

142.         If an officer is transferred to foreign service while on leave, he ceases
from the date of such transfer to be on leave and to draw leave salary.

143.        An officer transferred to foreign service shall remain in the cadre or cadres
in  which  he  was  included  in  a  substantive    or  officiating  capacity
immediately before his transfer, and may be given such substantive or
officiating promotion in those cadres as the authority competent to order
promotion may decide. In giving promotion, such authority shall take
into account-

                (a)    the nature of the work performed in foreign service, and

            (b)   the promotion given to juniors in the cadre in which the question of

promotion arises.

144.        An officer in foreign service will draw pay from the foreign employer
from  the  date  on  which  he  relinquishes  charge  of  his  post  in
Government  Service.    Subject  to  any  restrictions  which  the
Government may by general order impose, the amount of his pay, the
amount  of  joining  time  admissible  to  him  and  his  pay  during  such
joining time will be fixed by the authority sanctioning the transfer in
consultation with the foreign employer.

  Note 1.-When transfer to foreign service is sanctioned the pay which he
shall receive in such service must be precisely specified in the order
sanctioning  the  transfer.    If  it  is  intended  that  he  shall  receive  any
remuneration, or enjoy any concession of pecuniary value, in addition
to his pay proper, the exact nature of such remuneration or concession
must be similarly specified.  No officer will be permitted to receive any
remuneration or enjoy any concession which is not so specified, and if
the order is silent as to any particular  remuneration or concession, it
must be assumed that the intention is that it shall not be enjoyed.

181

CHAP XI ]

FOREIGN SERVICE

[ RULE 144

  Note  2.- No order of transfer to foreign  service shall be issued without

previous consultation with the Finance Department.  It shall be open

to that department to prescribe by general or special order, cases in

which its consent may be presumed to have been given.

  *Note 3.- No deputation allowance shall be paid to the officers on deputation

to foreign service.

   This shall be deemed to have come into force w,e,f, 22nd July, 1997.

             † Provided that no deputation allowance shall be granted for the period in
excess of five years to an  officer even if deputation is allowed to continue

beyond 5 years continuously.

             # In cases where the headquarters of the officer is outside Kerala and the

deputation  is  to  institutions/bodies  aided  by  Government  industrial

undertakings  in  which  Government  hold  majority  of  shares  and  also

undertakings which are managed by Government, the deputationist’s pay in

foreign service shall not exceed his basic pay in Government service by
more than 50 per cent or ````` 300 whichever is less.

              # Effective from 17th December 1966.

              @ Provided further that such pay in foreign service shall not exceed the
basic  pay  in  Government  service  by  more  than  50  percent  or  `````  300
whichever is less.

               This proviso shall apply also to cases of extension of deputation to foreign

service sanctioned from 8th April 1965.

*[Substitution  G O(P) No. 184/2002/Fin., Dated 27/03/2002]
† [G O(P) No. 102/1993/Fin., Dated 10/02/1993]

# [G O(P) No. 254/1970/Fin., Dated  22/04/1970]

@ [G O(P) No. 128/1965/Fin., Dated  08/04/1965]

182

CHAP XI ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 144

  Note 4.- Specific terms in regard  to Travelling Allowance to be allowed to
officers for journeys on transfer to foreign service and on reversion
therefrom  should  invariably  be  prescribed  in  consultation  and
agreement with the foreign employer.

   Note  5.- An  officer  who  is  eligible  for  concessions  in  regard  to  medical
attendance for himself or his family should not be transferred to foreign
service, unless the foreign employer undertakes to afford to the officer
privileges not inferior to those which he would have enjoyed if he had
been employed in the service of Government

 *Note  6.- No officer to whose children educational concessions are admissible,
should be transferred to foreign service, unless the foreign employer
undertakes  to afford these privileges which the officer would have
enjoyed had he been employed  in the service of Government.

  Note 7.- The transit pay and allowances and transfer Travelling Allowance of
a  Government  servant  who  proceeds  on  transfer  from  one  foreign
employer to another without reverting to Government service should
be borne by the foreign employer to whom  the Government servant
proceeds on transfer.

   Effective  from November 24, 1967

               Government Decision

             †The Heads of Departments, while proposing the deputation of officers to
foreign service and the sections of the Secretariat while sanctioning such
proposals, will attach to the proposals or sanctions, as the case may be, a
separate statement giving the following details :-

                 (i)    Name of the Government servant

                (ii)    Date of Birth

*[G O(P) No. 621/1970/Fin., Dated  01/09/1970]
†[Circular Memorandum No. 42765/Rules-3/62/Fin., Dated 15/09/1962]

183

CHAP XI ]

FOREIGN SERVICE

[ RULE 144

               (iii)    To whom lent

               (iv)    Official designation (post held substantively before transfer)

                  (v)      Scale of pay of the post in Government service held substantively  by the

officer

               (vi)    Head of account to which pay was debitable before transfer

              (vii)    Monthly rate of pay sanctioned in foreign service

             (viii)    Service rules applicable

               (ix)     Rate of monthly contributions provisionally fixed under rule:

         (a)   Leave salary

         (b)   Pension

                (x)    When lent

                (xi)   Where to be recovered

               (xii)   Whether creditable to State or Central

              (xiii)    Date of termination of foreign service.

              Ruling No. 1

                  An officer holding a provisional appointment deputed to foreign service,

will be allowed to draw, in foreign service, the pay and allowances attached

to the provisional appointment, only if it is certified by the competent

authority that the officer would have held the provisional appointment

but for his deputation to foreign service.

              Ruling No. 2

             *(i)    For the period from 1-7-1978 to 30-4-1979, Officers on deputation will be

allowed deputation allowance at the rates prescribed in the concerned

*[G O(P) No. 359/1981/Fin., Dated  04/06/1981]

184

CHAP XI ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 144-146

Government  Order  by  which  the  deputation  was  sanctioned  based  on

their pre-revision pay in Government Service.

                 (ii)    Those who continue to draw pay in the pre-revision scale on 1-5-1979

are eligible for deputation allowance from 1-5-1979 at the rates specified

in Note 3 above.  But the minimum of the revised scales of the posts

from which they are deputed, will be the basis for determining the rate

of deputation allowance. “Pay in the pre-revision scale” means the pay

of the Officer concerned in the scale of pay as it stood as on 30-6-1978.

145.(a)  While an officer is in foreign service contribution towards the cost of his

pension and leave salary must be paid to General Revenues on his behalf.

       (b)   Contributions due under clause (a)  above shall be paid by the officer himself,

unless the foreign employer consents to pay them. They shall be payable during

leave taken while in foreign service.

    Note.-   A  copy  of  the  orders  sanctioning  an  officer’s  transfer  to  foreign

service must always be communicated to the Audit Officer.  The Officer

himself should, without delay, communicate a copy to the officer who

audits his pay, and take his instructions as to the officer to whom he is

to account for the contribution;  report to the latter officer the time and

date of all transfers of charge to which he is a party when proceeding

on, while in, and on return from foreign service; and furnish from time

to time particulars   regarding his pay in foreign service, leave taken by

him, his postal address, and any other information which that officer

may require.

146.     *Recovery of pension contribution in respect of Government servants on

deputation to foreign service shall be at the rate of 15 per cent of the maximum

of the scale of pay of the post from which deputation is sanctioned.  If the

scale of pay is revised or the Government Servant gets promotion in the

* [G O (P) No. 742/1984/Fin., Dated 15/12/1984]

185

CHAP XI ]

FOREIGN SERVICE

[ RULE 146

present department the recovery shall be at the rate of 15 per cent of the
maximum of the revised scale of pay or the scale of pay of the post to which
the officer is promoted in the parent department, as the case may be.

                 The leave salary contribution shall be 10 percent of the maximum of the scale
of pay of the post of the deputationist in the parent department.   If the scale
of pay is revised or the Government servant gets promotion in the parent
department, the recovery shall be at 10 percent of the maximum of the revised
scale of pay or the scale of the post to which the officer is promoted in the
parent department, as the case may be.

               The combined rate of leave salary and pension contribution shall be 25 per

cent of the maximum of the scale of pay.

               Contribution shall be paid for the actual period of duty in the foreign service
including all kinds of leave taken while on foreign service.  Contribution shall
be paid for each calendar month or part thereof and no contribution shall
be paid for the periods of joining time.

  *Note.-  Leave salary contribution will not be realised in respect of Government
officers serving on deputation on foreign service terms, in undertakings
which are owned or controlled by the State Government. If the officer
avails of leave while on such foreign service, the full expenditure should
be borne by the concerned foreign employer and if the officer avail of
leave after return from the foreign service, the expenditure should be
borne by the Government.

This Note shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st April

1982.

              Government Decision.

              # Leave salary and pension contribution will be recovered in whole rupees,
fractions  equal  to  50  paise  being  rounded  off  to  the  next  higher  rupee.

* [G O(P) No. 169/1983/Fin., Dated  06/04/1983]

# [G O(P) No. 883/1970/Fin., Dated  02/12/1970]

186

CHAP XI ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 146-147

Rounding off will be done (1) at the initial stage while calculating the rates of

monthly contributions, (2) while recovering contributions for part of a month

at the beginning or at the end of foreign service and (3)  where rates of

monthly  contributions  are  refixed  due  to  a  change  in  the  rates  of  pay,

deputation  allowance,  etc.,  and  the  total  contribution  recoverable  for  a

calendar month are not in whole rupees.

          This  decision  will  take  effect  from  1st August  1970,  i.e.,  in  respect  of
contributions for August 1970 recoverable in September 1970.

147.       The rate of pension and leave salary contribution prescribed in Rule 146 is to

secure the officer the pension that he would have earned by service under

the State Government if he had not been transferred to foreign service and

the leave salary on the scale and under the conditions applicable to him.  In

calculating the rate of leave salary admissible for earned leave alone, the pay

drawn  in  foreign  service  less,  in  the  case  of  officers  paying  their  own
contributions,  such  part  of  the  pay  as  may  be  paid  as  contribution,  will

count as pay for the  purpose of leave salary; provided that the difference

between the amount of leave salary that would have been admissible to the

officer had he remained in Government Service and the amount of leave

salary admissible as aforesaid, shall be recovered from the foreign employer.

   Note 1.-As the rates prescribed for such contribution have been calculated

on the basis of the *leave on full or half pay normally taken by an

officer  during  the  total  period  of  his  services  and  do  not  take  into

account any compensatory allowance which may form part of leave

salary, the whole expenditure in respect of any compensatory allowance

for periods of leave in or at the end of foreign service shall be borne by

the foreign employer and a condition to this effect should be inserted

in the terms of transfer to foreign service.

* [G O(P) No. 491/1975/Fin., Dated  24/10/1975]

187

CHAP XI ]

FOREIGN SERVICE

[ RULE 147

   Note 2.- The foreign employers should in the case of officers transferred to

foreign service accept liability of leave salary in respect of disability

leave granted on account of a disability incurred in and through foreign

service even though such disability manifests itself after the termination

of foreign service.  The leave salary charges for such leave should be

recovered direct from foreign employers, a condition to this effect being

inserted in the terms of transfer to  foreign service.

   !Note 3.- Leave salary in respect of maternity leave granted to and enjoyed

by a female Government servant while in foreign service will be borne
by the foreign employer.

                Government Decision No.1

              * In the case of an officer who takes leave on the conclusion of foreign

service before rejoining his post, the leave salary should be calculated

taking  into  account  the  pay  drawn  in  foreign  service  also  and  the

difference in leave salary should be recovered from the foreign employer

as provided in the above rule.  Orders sanctioning deputation to foreign

service  should  specifically  include  a  provision  for  the  recovery  of

difference in the leave salary from the foreign employer.  Leave salary in

respect of leave taken after rejoining duty under Government shall be

governed by the provisions in Rules 92 to 95 above.

             †However the recovery contemplated above will not apply in respect of
officers on deputation on foreign service terms to undertakings which

are  owned  or  controlled  by  the  Government,  in  whose  case  no  leave

salary contributions will be realised.

! [G O(P) No. 21/1966/Fin., Dated 17/01/1966]

*[G O(P) No. 491/1975/Fin., Dated  24/10/1975]
†[G O(P) No. 214/1985/Fin., Dated 11/04/1985]

188

CHAP XI ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 147

                Government Decision No. 2

             * When a Government servant is transferred to foreign service in India, an
extract of the leave account of the Government servant will be furnished to

the  foreign  employer  by  the Accountant  General  in  respect  of  Gazetted

Officers and by the Head of Office in respect of Non-Gazetted Officers so

that  the  foreign  employer  may  determine  the  leave  admissible  to  the

Government servant and the leave salary payable to him. Whenever leave is

granted by the foreign employer a copy of the orders granting leave to the

Government  servant  may  be  endorsed  by  the  foreign  employer  to  the

Accountant General in respect of Gazetted Officers and to the Head of the

office of the parent department in the case of Non-Gazetted Officers.  The

foreign employer will pay the leave salary which will be reimbursed to him by

the Accountant General in the case of Gazetted Officers and by the Head of

the Office (of the parent department) in the case of Non-Gazetted Officers.

The claim for the reimbursement of leave salary thus paid by the foreign

employer may be made half yearly for the period from April  to September

and October to March.  While sending the claim to the Accountant General

or Head of Office concerned, the foreign employer will give the name and

designation  of  the  Government  servant,  nature  and  period  of  leave

sanctioned, the number and date of sanction, rate of leave salary and amount

of leave salary paid. On receipt of the claim from the foreign employer the

Accountant General or Head of Office will verify the claim with reference to

the entries in the leave account and arrange to reimburse the amount by

means of a bank draft within a month of receipt of the claim. The expenditure

will be debited to the head of account to which the leave salary is debitable.

It  should  be  noted  that  in  both  cases,  the  amount  of  leave  salary  to  be

reimbursed to the foreign employer will be the leave salary (excluding Dearness

Allowance and other compensatory allowance) to which the Government

* [G O(P) No. 229/1976/Fin., Dated 02/08/1976]

189

CHAP XI ]

FOREIGN SERVICE

[ RULES 147-150

servant would have been eligible but for foreign services as the difference

between the leave salary to which the officer is eligible and that he would

have received but for foreign services together with Dearness Allowance

and  other  compensatory  allowance  is  to  be  finally  borne  by  the  foreign

employer.

148.      The Government may -

                  (a)   remit the contributions due in any specified case or class of cases, and

             (b)  make rules prescribing the rate of interest, if any, to be levied on

overdue  contributions.

149.      An officer in foreign service may not elect to withhold contributions and

forfeit  right to count as duty in Government service the time spent in foreign

employ.  The contribution paid on his behalf maintains his claim to pension,

or to pension  and leave salary, as the case may be, in accordance with the

rules of the service of which he is a member.  Neither he nor the foreign

employer has any right of property in a contribution paid and no claim for

refund can be entertained.

150.       Contribution for leave salary or pension, due in respect of an officer on

foreign service, may be paid annually within fifteen days from  the end of

each *calendar year or at the end of the foreign service, if the foreign

service expires before the end of a *calendar year, and if the payment is

not made within the said period, interest must be paid to Government on

the unpaid contribution, unless it is specifically remitted by Government,
at the rate of two paise per day per ````` 100 from the date of expiry of the
period aforesaid upto the date on which the contribution is finally paid.

The interest shall be paid by the officer or the foreign employer according

as the contribution is paid by the former or the latter.

*[G O(P) No. 742/1984/Fin., Dated  15/12/1984]

190

CHAP XI ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULES 151-152

151.        An Officer transferred to foreign service may not without the sanction of the
Government accept a pension or gratuity from his foreign employer in respect
of such service.

152.     An officer in foreign service may not be granted leave otherwise than in
accordance with the rules applicable to the service of which he is a member
and may not take leave or receive leave salary from Government unless he
actually quits duty and goes on leave.

   †Exception.- An officer on foreign service out of India may be granted leave
by the foreign employer on such conditions as he may determine.  In
any  individual  case,  the  authority  sanctioning  the  transfer  may
determine beforehand, in consultation with the foreign employer,
the conditions on which leave will be granted by him.  The leave
salary in respect of leave granted by the foreign employer will be
paid by him and the leave will not be debited against the officer’s
leave account.

             This exception shall be deemed to have  come into force with effect from 1st

March 1965.

   Note.-  An officer on foreign service is himself personally responsible for the
observance of the rules regarding leave in foreign service, by accepting
leave to which he is not entitled under the rules, he renders himself
liable to refund leave salary irregularly drawn, and in the event of his
refusing to refund, he forfeits his previous service under Government
and ceases to have any claim on Government in respect of either pension
or leave salary.

               Government Decision No. 1

              *[Deleted]

† [G O(P) No. 390/1966/Fin., Dated 20/08/1966]
* [G O(P) No. 477/1997/Fin., Dated  01/04/1997]

191

CHAP XI ]

FOREIGN SERVICE

[ RULES 152-154

               Government Decision No. 2

              *[Deleted]

              * Effective from 30th May 1996.

153.     An Officer in foreign service, if appointed to officiate in a post in
Government service, will draw pay calculated on the pay of the post
in Government service on which he holds a lien or would hold a lien
had  his  lien  not  been  suspended  and  that  of  the  post  in  which  he
officiates.  His pay in foreign service will not be taken into account
in fixing his pay.

154.       †An Officer reverts from foreign service to Government service on the date
on which he takes charges of his post in Government service;  provided that
if he takes leave on the conclusion of foreign service before rejoining his
post, his reversion shall take effect from such date as the Government may
decide.

             As and when an order transferring a non-gazetted employee to foreign
service is issued by the competent authority, the head of the office where
the employee is then working should make an entry in his Service Book
regarding  the  transfer  to  foreign  service.    The  head  of  office  should
simultaneously furnish to the Accountant General information regarding
the  date  of    relief  of  the  transferred  officer,    his  pay,  date  of  his  next
increment, scale of pay of post held by him at the time of relief etc.  Based
on  the  sanction  and  particulars  received    from  the  head  of  office,  the
Accountant General will intimate the departmental officer concerned and the
foreign  employer  the  foreign  service  account  number  assigned  to  the
transferred officer and the rate of foreign service contribution recoverable in
his case.  On receipt of the communication, the head of office should note in

the Service Book the rate of contribution as fixed  by the Accountant General.

* [G O(P) No. 477/1997/Fin., Dated  01/04/1997]
† [G O(P) No. 250/1983/Fin., Dated 11/05/1983]

192

CHAP XI ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 154

At the time of reversion of the employee from foreign service, the head of the
office to which he is posted should intimate the Accountant General the date
of  his  rejoining  State  Service  and  the  date  of  termination  of  his  foreign
service as fixed under Rule 154, Part I, Kerala Service Rules.  On receipt of the
sanction reverting the officer to State Service and the particulars about his
rejoining duty, the Accountant General will check whether the foreign service
contributions  have  been  recovered  in  full.   As  and  when  the  recovery  is
completed, the Accountant General will sent to the head of the office in
which  the  Government  servant  is  working  at  that  time  a  communication
showing the position about the recovery of contributions; a copy of it will
be simultaneously endorsed to the employee also.  On the strength of this
communication, the head of the office should make an entry in the Service
Book  regarding  the  position  about  the  recovery  of  foreign  service
contributions,  giving  reference  to  the  communication  received  from  the
Accountant General.  The letter received from the Accountant General in
this regard should be kept in the Service Book itself for facilitating future
reference.    The  head  of  the  office  and  the  employee  concerned  should
acknowledge  the  receipt  of  the  communication  regarding  recovery  of
contributions.  Based on the entries in the Service Book made by the head of
the office and copies of the Accountant General’s communications kept in
the  Service  Book,  the  employee’s  pension  claims  will  be  settled  by  the
Accountant General at the time of his retirement.  In the event of any dispute
arising later about the recovery of contributions for want of necessary entries
in the Service Books, the employee concerned may produce his copy of the
communication received from the Accountant General as proof of recovery.
On production of his copy of the communication, the Accountant General
will verify the matter and settle his claims accordingly.

                  * While laying down the above procedure, Government would like to impress
upon all departmental officers that the responsibility for making entries relating

* [G O(P) No. 250/1983/Fin., Dated 11/05/1983]

193

CHAP XI ]

FOREIGN SERVICE

[ RULES 154-156

to foreign service in the Service Book of the Non-Gazetted Officers rests with

them.

                Effective from 1st June 1983.

155.       When an officer reverts from foreign service to Government service, his pay

will cease to be paid by the foreign employer and his contributions will be

discontinued with effect from the date of reversion.

156.        When an addition is made to a regular establishment on the condition

that its cost or a definite portion of its cost, shall be recovered from
the persons for whose benefit the additional establishment  is created,

recoveries shall be made under the following rules: -

                 a)    The amount to be recovered shall be the gross sanctioned cost of the

service or of the portion of the service, as the case may be, and shall

not vary with the actual expenditure of any month.

                  b)     The cost of the service shall include contribution at such rates as may

be laid down under Rule 146 and the contributions shall be calculated

on the sanctioned rates of pay of the members of the establishment.

                 c)    The Government may reduce the amount of recoveries or may entirely

forgo them.

    Note.-*  “The  term  ‘gross  sanctioned  cost  of  service’  shall  also    include

Dearness Allowance  and  other  Compensatory Allowances,  Bonus/

Special Festival Allowance, Interim Relief, Conveyance Allowance and

all other allowances that the employee would have drawn had he been

working in the Government Service  at  the same place”.   The monthly

compound of bonus/special festival allowance, shall be worked out  at

1/12th of the last declared bonus/special festival allowance for effecting

recovery on a monthly basis.

*[G O(P) No. 192/2002/Fin., Dated  01/04/2002]

194

CHAP XI ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 156

                Government Decision

           The procedure for the recovery of the cost of an establishment will be as

follows :-

                (i)   Gross Sanctioned cost of the service.- This will include the “average

cost” of the several posts included in the establishment together with

the Dearness Pay, Dearness Allowance, Special Dearness Allowance,

Personal Pay/Special Pay, **Bonus/Special Festival Allowance  and

other Compensatory Allowance admissible on the “average cost” for
this purpose will be calculated according to the formula given under

Rule 12 (35), Part I, Kerala Service Rules.

                (ii)    Pension and leave salary contribution.- This contribution in respect of

a post will be worked out at one-fourth-of the total of the “average

cost”  plus  Dearness  Pay,  Special    Pay/Personal  Pay  **and    Bonus/
Special Festival Allowance admissible on the average cost.

                    ** Effective from 29th October 1992

             (iii)   †Calculation of average age at entry in the grade.-

  (a)      In  grades  where  direct  recruitment  is  generally  made.-    If  the

recruitment is generally made between 18 and 24/25 years, for example,

the age of entry can with advantage be adopted uniformly as 21,

instead of calculating it on the basis of age of entry of all persons in

service on a date or recruited during a specified period which would

involve unnecessary labour not yielding commensurate advantage.

The  average  cost  thus  worked  out  on  the  above  basis  may  hold

good till there is a revision of scales or other conditions of service,

e.g., age of retirement, etc.

** [G O(P) No. 446/1993/Fin., Dated 24/08/1993]
† [Circular No. 62/1963/Fin., Dated  09/08/1963 & No. 05/1964/Fin., Dated 16/01/1964]

195

CHAP XI ]

FOREIGN SERVICE

[ RULES 156-159

  (b)    In grades where appointments are generally made by promotion

but  occasionally  direct  recruitment  is  also  resorted  to.-  The

factor of age of entry would in this case by depending  on the

incidence  of  promotion  in  individual  establishment    and  no

uniform age of entry can therefore be indicated.  To get more

accurate result the age of entry may be arrived at in these cases

on the basis of the age of entry of all persons in service in that
grade on 1st April of the year in which the occasion to calculate
the  average  cost  arises.   As  the  basis  of  average  cost  itself  is
somewhat approximate, a change in the age of entry from year to

year is of little consequence and therefore the age of entry thus

arrived  at and for that matter the average cost worked out on that

basis, may hold good for a reasonable period, say 5 years, after

which it may be reviewed, unless there is a general revision of the
scales of pay or conditions of services in the meantime.

SERVICE  UNDER  LOCAL  FUNDS

157.       Officers paid from Local Funds which are administered by Government are

subject to the provisions of these service rules.

158.         The transfer of officers to service under Local Funds which are not administered

by Government will be regulated by the rules in this chapter.

159.      Persons transferred to Government service from a Local Fund which is not

administered by Government will be treated as joining a first post under

Government and their previous service will not count  as duty performed.

The  Government  may,  however,  allow  previous  service  in  such  cases  to
count as duty performed on such terms as it thinks fit.

              Ruling

                  The  pay  of  an  officer  transferred  from  a  Local  Fund  Institution  not

administered by Government to Government service will be fixed at the

196

CHAP XI ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I

[ RULE 159

minimum of the scale of pay of the post in Government service if the pay

he was drawing under the Local Fund is less than the minimum.  In case

he  was  drawing,  under    the  Local  Fund,  pay  above  the  minimum  and

equal to a stage in the scale of pay of the post in Government service, his

pay will be fixed at that stage and if the pay he was drawing under the

Local Fund is not a stage in the scale of pay of the post in Government

service it will be fixed at the next lower stage, the difference being treated

as personal pay to be absorbed in future increases in pay.  His next increment

will ordinarily be allowed only after the full incremental period of duty in
Government service.

197

PART II
TRAVELLING ALLOWANCES

198

CHAP I ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULE 1

CHAPTER    I

SECTION I

GRADES OF OFFICERS

1.           For the purpose of calculating Travelling Allowances, officers are classified

into the following four grades :-

            †(i)   First Grade.-  All officers in receipt of actual pay of † ````` 3000 and
above, and officers belonging to All India Services, non-All India

Service  Officers  holding  posts  borne  on  the  cadre  of  All  India

Services, Heads of Departments and Officers of the Indian Army,

Navy  or Air  Force  appointed  as Aides-de-camp  to  the  Governor

irrespective of the pay drawn by them.

             (ii)   Second Grade.- (a)  Officers  in receipt of actual pay of † ````` 2,500  and

above but below † ````` 3,000.

                                                     (b)  Officers  in receipt of actual pay of †````` 1,600  and

above but below † ````` 2,500.

               (iii)   Third Grade .-  Officers  in receipt of actual pay of † ````` 950  and above but

below † ````` 1,600.

               (iv)  Fourth Grade.- Officers  in receipt of basic pay below † ````` 950.

                       †These amendments shall be deemed to have come into force on 18th

July 1994.

  Note- 1.- All Private Secretaries to Ministers and the Private Secretary to the
Speaker will be treated as Grade I Officers from 28th June 1969 and 2nd
September 1969 respectively for purposes of Travelling Allowances,

irrespective of the pay drawn by them.

†[G O(P) No. 391/2002/Fin., Dated 19/06/2002]

199

CHAP I ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULE 1

    *Note  2.-  For  the  purpose  of  calculating  the T.A.  for  accompanying  the

Governor, Advisers or Ministers on tour, non-gazetted officers, other

than those in the last grade, will be treated as Second Grade (b) officers

irrespective of the “actual pay” drawn by them.

   Note 3.- The term ‘pay’ occurring in this part of the rules should be deemed

to include only - Pay as defined in Rule 12 (23) (i) and (iii) of Part I,

Kerala Service Rules, and personal pay, dearness pay and special pay

treated as coming under classes I and II under Appendix IV, Kerala

Service Rules.

   Note 4.- The classification of a re-employed  pensioner for purposes of

Travelling Allowances will be determined on the following basis –

 (a)   Where the pension is held in abeyance during the period of re-

employment, the grade of the re-employed pensioner shall be
determined, in accordance with the pay actually received from

time to time.

 (b)    Where a pension is allowed to be drawn in addition to pay, the re-

employed pensioner should be deemed to be in receipt of actual

pay equivalent to his re-employed pay plus pension, subject to

the proviso that if the sum of such pay plus pension exceeds the

pay of the post if it is on a fixed rate of pay or the maximum pay of

the post, if it is on a time-scale of pay, such excess shall be ignored.

 (c)     If a portion of the pension has been commuted, the amount of

pension to be taken into account for the purpose of clause (b)

will  be the amount including the pensionary equivalent of the

commuted  value.    The  amount  of  pension  to  be  taken  into

account will also include the pension equivalent of the death-

cum-retirement gratuity, if any.

*[G O(P) No. 438/1968/Fin., Dated  19/08/1968]

200

CHAP I ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULES 1-4

  *Note 5.- Class IV employees drawing pay of  `  `  `  `  `  950 and above consequent
on getting time bound grade promotion shall be included under Third
Grade for the limited purpose of Travelling Allowance/Daily Allowance
claims.

                       (These amendments shall be deemed to have come into force on 18th

July 1994)

2.           The Government may, for reasons which should be recorded, order that any
officer or grade of officers shall be included in a grade higher or lower than
that prescribed in the above rule.

3.              An  officer in transit from one post to another ranks in the grade to which the

lower of the two posts would entitle him.

4.        The Travelling Allowance of an officer who is promoted or reverted with
retrospective effect, should not be revised in respect of the period intervening
between the date of promotion or reversion, and that on which it is ordered.

               Government Decision No. 1

            † In all cases of belated grant of increments, other than those where such
increments have been specifically withheld under competent orders, where
the class or grade of officers for drawal of T.A. has been changed consequent
on such belated grant of increments, the officers concerned will be eligible
to draw the  enhanced rate of T.A. with retrospective effect, i.e., from the
date on which the increment has actually fallen due.

               Government Decision No. 2

             #  In cases of belated issue of pay slips for ordinary increments, which do
not depend on the passing of tests, completion of probation, retrospective

*[G O(P) No. 391/2002/Fin., Dated 19/06/2002]
†[G O(Ms.) No. 452/1960/Fin., Dated 21/09/1960]
# [G O(P) No. 667/1969/Fin., Dated 15/12/1969]

201

CHAP I ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULES 4-5

confirmation, promotion, revision of pay scales, etc.,  but are delayed for

some routine reason or other, the officers concerned will be eligible to draw

the  enhanced  rate  of T.A.  with  retrospective  effect,  i.e.,  from  the  date  on

which the increment has actually fallen due.  But such claims for arrears of

T.A  will  be  paid  by  the Treasury  Officers  only  after  special  audit  by  the

Accountant General.

               Government Decision No. 3

             *It is clarified that the above Decision No. 2 is applicable to all cases of
belated issue of pay slips, when the delay in issue of pay slips is not due

to any fault of the officer, i.e., it is only when increments are delayed on

account  of  specific  orders  of  competent  authorities  that  the  benefit

contemplated in the above decision shall be denied.

SECTION  II

GENERAL

5.             The following  are the different kinds of Travelling  Allowances which may be

drawn in different circumstances by officers:-

               (a)   Permanent Travelling Allowance

               (b)  Conveyance Allowance

               (c)   Mileage Allowance

               (d)   Daily Allowance

               (e)   Actual Travelling Expenses.

               The Rules in this Chapter explain the nature of these allowances and the

method of calculating them.  The circumstances, in which they may be

drawn for particular journeys, are described in Chapters II to IV.

*[G O(P) No. 570/1975/Fin., Dated  22/12/1975]

202

CHAP I ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULES 5-5A

               Government Decision No. 1

              * The expressions ‘road mileage’ and ‘mileage allowance’ wherever they occur

shall be assigned meaning as referring to distance in kilometres.

               Government Decision No. 2

             †An Officer of Government required to attend meetings of the Board of
Directors or Committees of an Industrial Concern or a Bank or a Joint
Stock Company on behalf of  Government   shall  receive T.A. and D.A.
from Government according to rules.  The officer should credit the entire
T.A. and sitting fee paid by the Industrial Concern or Bank to the receipt
head corresponding to the head of account to which his T.A. is debited.
He will also forward to the Accountant General in advance a statement of
T.A. and sitting fee to which he is entitled for attending such meetings in
a month so as to enable the Accountant General to watch recovery.  The
practice of crediting to Government the T.A. received from the University
of  Kerala  according  to  its  rules  and  receiving T.A.  according  to  State
T.A. rules as laid down in G.O. (Ms.) 330/59/Fin., dated 29th June 1959 will
be discontinued from 1st August 1960 in respect of Government officers
travelling  on  University  business  and  instead  they  will  be  allowed  to
receive T.A. direct from the University according to its rules.

5A.        # The right of a Government servant to Travelling Allowance including
daily allowance shall be forfeited or deemed to have been relinquished if
the claim for it is not preferred to the drawing officer or controlling officer
within one year from the date on which it fell due.

                !This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 12th

September 1967.

*[G O(P) No. 36/1964/Fin., Dated  20/01/1964]
†[G O(Ms.) No. 370/1960/Fin., Dated 27/07/1960]
# [G O(P) No. 6/1968/Fin., Dated  04/01/1968]
![G O(P) No. 106/1970/Fin., Dated 07/02/1970]

203

CHAP I ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULE 6

SECTION III

PERMANENT  TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCE

6.            A permanent monthly Travelling Allowance may be granted by Government
to  any  officer  whose  duties  require  him  to  travel  extensively.    Such  an
allowance is granted in lieu of all other forms of Travelling Allowance for
journeys within the officer’s sphere of duty and is drawn all the year round,
whether the officer is absent from his headquarters or not.

               Government Decision No. 1

          Since Permanent Travelling Allowance is fixed at a monthly rate it is not
necessary  that  the  officer  should  be  on  tour  beyond  8  kilometres  from
headquarters  on  all  days  of  the  month.    Even  for  days  he  is  not  on  tour
outside 8 kilometres from headquarters he can draw Permanent Travelling
Allowance.    This  does  not  however  mean  that  Permanent  Travelling
Allowance can be drawn without leaving headquarters on any day of the
month.  The drawal of the allowance will be governed by the order fixing the
rate  of  Permanent  Travelling Allowance  and  prescribing  the  terms  and
conditions for  its drawal. For the drawal of full amount of Permanent Travelling
Allowance an officer should be on tour outside 8 kilometres from headquarters
for 15 days in a month and should spend at least 6 hours outside headquarters
on each such day.  If the minimum number of days of  travel is not performed
reduction has to be made as per the terms and conditions of the Permanent
Travelling Allowance

            This decision shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 9th

December 1970.

               Government Decision No. 2

                The following procedure will be followed for drawal of P.T.A in cases where
an officer is on duty for a  part of a month and also in cases where the officer
has been on duty for the whole month but has not toured for the minimum
number of days prescribed :-

204

CHAP I ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULES 6-7

            (a)    If  an  officer  is  on  duty  for  a  part  of  a  month  he  will  be  allowed

proportionate P.T.A. for the days he is on duty provided that the

officer is on tour for the proportionate number of  days with  reference

to the minimum days of tour prescribed.

                  (b)    For every  day short toured, a deduction of  will  ( I x PTA) / Y be made

where Y is the minimum number of days of tour prescribed.

                     Example.- Suppose an officer whose P.T.A. is ````` 40 per mensem, and
whose minimum period of touring is fixed as 20 days per  month, is on
duty only for 20 days in a month of 30 days.  He is entitled to a P.T.A.
of  ````` (20 x 40)/30  =  ````` 26.67 provided, he puts in not less than the
proportionate number of tour days, i.e., (20 x 20)/30 = 13 days.  For
every day short toured by him a deduction of 1/20 of ` ` ` ` `  40 will be made
(i.e., if he tours only for 12 days, an amount of  ` ` ` ` ` 2 will be deducted
from ` ` ` ` `  26.67).

                (c)   In cases where the officer is on duty for the whole month but has not

toured for the minimum number of days prescribed, a deduction of   (X

x P.T.A) / Y  will be made  where  X and Y are the shortfall in the number

of days of tour and the minimum number of days of tour prescribed in

a month respectively.

                           Example.- Suppose an officer whose P.T.A is ````` 40 per mensem and whose
minimum  number of tour days is fixed as 20 per month, is on duty for the
whole month and tours only for 15 days,  a deduction of 5 x 40/20  = ` ` ` ` `  10
is to be made from his P.T.A. of  ` ` ` ` ` 40 per mensem.

                         Effective from 8th June 1962.

7.                A Permanent Travelling Allowance may not be drawn during leave, temporary

transfer or joining time, or unless in any case, it be otherwise expressly provided

in these rules, during any period for which Travelling Allowance of any other

kind is drawn.

205

CHAP I ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULES 8-11

8.            When an officer  holds, either substantively or in an officiating capacity, two
or more posts to each of which a Permanent Travelling Allowance is attached,
he may be granted such Permanent Travelling Allowance, not exceeding the
total of all the allowances, as the Government may consider to be necessary
in order to cover the travelling expenses which he has to incur.

SECTION IV

CONVEYANCE  ALLOWANCE

*9.          [The Government may grant, on such conditions as they think fit to impose,
a monthly conveyance allowance to any officer who is required to travel
extensively or within a specified area from his headquarters under conditions
which do not render him eligible for daily allowance.

 *Note.- Every recommendation made to Government for the grant of a
conveyance  allowance  should  contain  detailed  information
regarding the nature of the officers work, the approximate area of
the  locality  within  which  the  conveyance  is  to  be  used  and  the
approximate average amount of travelling which the officer has to
perform in a day.

*10.          Except  as  otherwise  provided  in  these  rules  and  unless  the  Government
otherwise direct, a conveyance allowance drawn all the year round, is not
forfeited during absence from Headquarters and may be drawn in addition to
any other travelling allowance admissible under the rules provided that an
officer, who is in receipt of a conveyance allowance shall not draw mileage
allowamce/  daily  allowance  for  a  journey  within  their  specified  area/
jurisdiction  or  within  8km,  from  time  to  time    on  such  condition  as  the
Government may prescribe.

*11.        A conveyance allowance shall not be drawn during leave or temporary
transfer/ holidays prefixed or suffixed to leave and during joining time.]

*[Substitution C.S No.1/2002 GO(P) No. 252/2002/Fin., Dated 25/04/2002]

206

CHAP I ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULES 12-13

SECTION V
MILEAGE  ALLOWANCE

SUB - SECTION  I
General

12.          A mileage allowance is an allowance, calculated on the distance travelled

which is given to meet the cost of a particular journey.

13.(a)   For the purpose of calculating mileage allowance, a journey between two
places is held to have been performed by the shortest of two or more practicable
routes or by the cheapest of such routes as may be equally short; provided
that when there are alternative railway routes and the difference between
them in point of time and cost is not   great, mileage allowance may be calculated
on the route actually used.

    (b)   The shortest route is that by which a traveller can most speedily reach his
destination  by  the  ordinary  modes  of  travelling.    In  case  of  doubt,  the
Government will declare which shall be regarded as the shortest of two or
more routes.

               Government Decision No. 1

                 *The shortest distance between Ernakulam to Fort Cochin and Mattancherry
and  vice  versa  would  be  the  distance  by  road  for  purpose  of  Travelling
Allowance.

               Government Decision No. 2

            † The route via., Mavelikkara would be the shortest route for journeys
between Chengannur and Alleppey for purpose of Travelling Allowance.

                  [This  will  have  effect  till  bridges  are  opened  in  all  three  ferries  in  the

Changancherry route]

*[G O(Ms.)No. 117/1964/Fin., Dated 16/03/1964]
† [G O(Rt.) No. 2723/1964/Fin., Dated  08/12/1964]

207

CHAP I ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULES 13-14

               Government Decision No. 3

                @ In the case of air journeys from Trivandrum to Delhi via., Bombay the claim

should be supported by a certificate that no seat was available via., Madras.

But the Chief Secretary to Government, Members of the Board of Revenue,

Secretaries  and  Additional  Secretaries  to  Government    and  Heads  of

Departments are permitted to travel either via., Bombay or Madras for the

journeys to Delhi and back.

                 [Circular Memorandum No. 53/64/Fin., dated 6th June 1964 and G.O. (P) No. 699/

64/Fin., dated 30th September 1964].

      (c)    If an officer travels by a route which is not the shortest but is cheaper than

the shortest, his mileage allowance should be calculated on the route actually

used.

14.            The  Government  in  respect  of  Heads  of  Departments  and  the  Heads  of
Departments in the case of their subordinates may, for special reasons which

should be recorded, permit mileage allowance to be calculated on a route

other than the shortest or cheapest,  provided that the journey is actually

performed by such route.

  *Note 1.-The sanction of Government is not required for the claim for higher

road mileage by an officer of the First Grade for a journey performed by

road between places connected by rail or by air within the State.  The

signature of the officer on the Travelling Allowance bill will be sufficient

for the purpose of this rule.  In such cases, the full rate of mileage

allowance will be allowed upto 200 kilometres a day irrespective of the

fact  whether  any  inspection  work  is  done  or  any  public  purpose  is

served en-route and at three fourths of the full rate for the  remaining

distance.

@,*[G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated 29/03/1989]

208

CHAP I ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULES 14-15

    *Note  2.-  In  cases  where  the  distance  to  be  travelled  from  the

Headquarters  to    perform  the  duty  at  the  outstation  is  within  50

kilometres, the onward journey shall be performed on the day on

which  official  business  is  to  be  transacted.    Similarly  the  return

journey shall be performed on the day on which official business is

completed at the outstation.

             *Effective from 1st November 1979

    @Note 3.- Whenever autorickshaws/taxies are used for official journeys from
residence or office to Airport/Railway Station/Bus Station and back,

the autorickshaw/taxifare at the rates fixed by the Government from

time to time shall be reimbursed.

          [This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force on the 22nd

July 1987]

15.          # A journey on transfer is held to begin or end at the actual residence
of the Government servant concerned.  Any other journey (excluding a

journey of the type referred to in the note below) is held  to begin or

end in any station  at the duty point in that station.

    Explanation.-For  the  purpose  of  this  rule  the    “duty  point’’  at  the

headquarters means the place or office where a Government servant

remains  on  duty,  i.e.,  the  place  or  office  of  employment  at  the

headquarters.  In the case of outstations the “duty point” means the

place or office visited by the Government servant on duty.  Whether

there  are  two  or  more  such  places  or  offices  at  an  outstation,  the

following shall be taken as the “duty point” :-

*[G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated 29/03/1989]

@ [Insertion G O(P) No. 391/2002/Fin., Dated 19/06/2002]
# [G O(P) No.16/1965/Fin., Dated 06/01/1965]

209

CHAP I ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULES 15-16

                 (a)    If a Government servant reaches that station by rail, steamer, or air, the

place or office which is farthest from the railway station, harbour (or

jetty)  or the air booking centre as the case may be.

                (b)    If he reaches that station by road, the place or office which is farthest

from the point from which the journey to that station commenced.

   Note.- Where the journey commences or ends at a station which is either the

Government servant’s headquarters or his places of duty, it may be

treated to have commenced or ended at his residence.

16.        *An Officer is required to travel by the class of accommodation for which

Travelling Allowance  is  admissible  to  him.    The  provisions  of  all  rules

regulating mileage allowance are subject to the condition  that if an officer

travels in a lower class of accommodation, he shall be entitled to the fare of

the  class  of  accommodation  actually  used  plus  the  incidental  expenses
admissible  to his grade calculated on the distance travelled in the case of rail

journeys  and  the  incidental  expenses  admissible  had  he  travelled  by  the

class  of  accommodation  by  which  he  is  entitled  to  travel  in  the  case  of

journeys by sea or air.

  † Note 1.- Officers who are eligible to travel by first class or air conditioned
class  and  who  actually  travel  by  that  class  and  claim  the  fare

accordingly,  should  furnish  the  following  certificate  in  their

Travelling Allowance bills namely:-

  “Certified that I have actually travelled in the class of accommodation for

which the fare is claimed in this bill”;

   Effective  from 1st November 1979.

*[G O(P) No. 216/1965/Fin., Dated  29/05/1965]

†[G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated 29/03/1989]

210

CHAP I ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULES 16-18

  *Note 2.- Non Gazetted Officers who are eligible to travel by first class/air

conditioned class but who are not drawing officers, shall furnish the

following declaration in their tour diary, namely:-

               “ I hereby declare that I have actually travelled by first class/air conditioned

class on …….(dates) from …….. (place)  to ……….. (place)”.

                 On the basis of the above declaration furnished by the non gazetted officers,

the drawing officers shall furnish the following certificate in the Travelling

Allowance bills of the nongazetted officers, namely:-

             “Certified that the officers for whom first class/air conditioned class railway
fare has been claimed in this bill have declared that they have actually travelled

by that class of accommodation”;

                 Effective from 31st March 1981.

17.       Mileage allowance is differently calculated as shown in the following
sections, according as the journey is or could be by railway, by sea, by

road or by air.

     SUB - SECTION II

Mileage  Allowance  for  Journeys  by  Railway

18.           For the purpose of calculating mileage allowance,  officers when travelling   by

railway are entitled to class of accommodation according to the following

scale:-

                   (a)    An Officer of the First Grade - Accommodation of the First Class (or the

highest class by whatever  name it is called).

                (b)    An officer of the Second Grade - Accommodation of the First Class.

                   (c)    An officer of the Third Grade or the Fourth Grade - Accommodation

of the Second Class.

*[G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated 29/03/1989]

211

CHAP I ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULES 18-19

                          !(d)    All Third and Fourth Grade Officers will be entitled to travel in ‘Sleeper

 Class’ while on tour if the journey includes night journey also.

                   [This amendment  shall be deemed to have come into effect from 7th December

1994]

  Note 1.- Air conditioned accommodation is not recognised as a class of
accommodation for the purpose of these rules except for journeys
on tour by officers holding  posts on a scale of pay the minimum  of
which is not less than † ````` 3000.  First Grade Officers holding posts
on a scale of pay the minimum of which is less than † ````` 3000 may
however travel by air conditioned accommodation while on tour
subject to the recovery of 13 paise per 10 kilometres or part thereof
if it exceeds 5 kilometres, from their T.A. bills.  This rule is applicable
in the case of journeys by air conditioned class in Deluxe trains
also.

  †[This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force on the 18th  July

1994].

  Note  2.- Officers of the Second and Third Grades will be allowed to travel in
air con `ditioned second* class accommodation in Deluxe trains at
public expense.

            *Effective  from 1st March 1975.

  # Note 3.-  [Deleted]

  Effective from 1st November , 1979.

19.       !The Government may, for special reasons which should be recorded,
declare  any  particular  officer  or  class  of  officers  to  be  entitled  to
accommodation of a higher class than that prescribed for his class in
clauses (b) or  (c) of Rule 18.

!Insertion,†[GO(P) No. 391/2002/Fin., Dated  19/06/2002]
*[G O(P) No.117/1977/Fin., Dated 13/03/1977]

!, # [G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated 29/03/1989]

212

CHAP I ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

 [ RULE 20

20.          Except in the case of journeys on transfer (the rules for which are contained
in section III), the mileage allowance admissible to  an officer is as follows:-

   *(a)   First Grade and Second Grade Officers who do not actually travel in First
Class/Air conditioned class and officers who are not eligible for First Class/
Air conditioned class of accommodation are entitled to mileage allowance at
the following rates:-

                 (i)      First Grade Officers                    -                36 paise per kilometre

                (ii)      Second Grade (a) Officers         -                28 paise per kilometre

               (iii)      Second Grade (b) Officers         -                28 paise per kilometre

               (iv)     Third Grade Officers                   -                24 paise per kilometre

                (v)      Fourth Grade Officers               -                20 paise per kilometre

           These rates are inclusive of incidental expenses and are applicable for
journeys irrespective of whether the places are connected by rail or not.

    *(b)    Officers  who  are  eligible  for  First  Class/Air  conditioned  class  of
accommodation and  who actually perform the journey by such class are
entitled to claim actual rail fare plus incidental expenses at the following
rates:

                 (i)      First Grade Officers                  -           12 paise per kilometre

                (ii)      Second Grade (a) Officers       -           10 paise per kilometre

               (iii)      Second Grade (b) Officers       -           10 paise per kilometre

               (iv)     Third Grade Officers                 -            6 paise per kilometre

                (v)      Fourth Grade Officers             -             5 paise per kilometre

               The above rates are subject to a minimum of half daily allowance.

                *[This shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st September

1995]

* [G O(P) No. 391/2002/Fin., Dated 19/06/2002]

213

CHAP I ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULE 20

               Government Decision No. 1

                * The Railway authorities entertain claims for refund of cancellation charges
on unused Railway tickets only from the passengers concerned.  So in case

where the  official rail journey is cancelled solely due to official reasons, the

Government servant should after getting the refund in the usual manner from

the Railway station prefer to the appropriate Railway authority concerned his

claim for refund of cancellation charges  (i.e., full ticket value excluding

reservation charges and refund already  received) on unused tickets supported

by a certificate from his controlling authority to the effect that the journey
had to be cancelled solely due to exigencies of service.  When the officer

himself is his own controlling officer for purposes of T.A. he may furnish his

own certificate.  The claim for the refund preferred on the Railways, should,

however, be restricted to what it would be, had the officer booked and cancelled

his journey by the shortest route, save in exceptional cases, where the route

actually adopted by the officer is certified by the controlling officer or by the

officer himself if he is his own controlling officer for T.A. purposes to be in

the interest of public service.

          Reservation charges in cases referred to above will be reimbursed to the

Government servant without waiting for the acceptance of his claim for refund

of  cancellation  charges  by  the  Railway  authorities.    The  amount  of

reservation fee reimbursed to a Government servant is debitable to the same

head to which his T.A. is charged.

               The Government servant should record a certificate as follows in the

T.A.  Bill for the claim.

             “Certified that the reservation of journey ticket made as per reservation

ticket No...... ................. on ......was cancelled due to exigencies of public

service.”

* [G O(P) No.388/1975/Fin., Dated 27/08/1975]

214

CHAP I ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

 [ RULES 20-25

              *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from

the 6th  October 1983.

                Government Decision No. 2

           #  The  reservation  charges  paid  for  railway  journeys  in  respect  of  the
appropriate classes of accommodation will be reimbursed to Government

servants as forming part of the fare in cases where reservation is actually

required in the exigencies of public service.

               This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from the

6th  October 1983.

21.         [Deleted] †

22.         [Deleted] †

23.         [Deleted] †

              † Effective from 1st November 1979.

24.        If available, return tickets at reduced rates should always be purchased

when an officer expects to perform the return journey by rail within the

period for which a return ticket is available.  The mileage allowance for

the  forward  and  the  return  journeys  wherever  such  return  tickets  are

available and are purchased will be the actual cost  of the return ticket

plus the usual allowance admissible for incidental expenses each way.

 SUB-SECTION  III

Mileage Allowace for Journeys by Sea in a Steamer

25.            For the purpose of calculating mileage allowance, officers are entitled to class

of  accommodation according to the following scale :-

*, # [G O(P) No. 639/1983/Fin., Dated 06/10/1983]

† [G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated 29/03/1989]

215

CHAP I ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULES 25-29

               (a)   An Officer of the First Grade

Highest  class

               (b)   An Officer of the Second Grade

If  there  be  two  classes  only  on  the

steamer the higher class, and if there

be more than two classes, middle or

second  class.

       (c)   An Officer of the Third  Grade

If  there  be  two  classes  only  on  the

steamer the lower class, if there be three

classes, middle class, or second class

and if there be four classes, third class.

           (d)   An officer of the Fourth Grade

Lowest class

26.          Except in the case of journeys on transfer the mileage allowance admissible

to an officer is single fare of the class of accommodation he is entitled to plus

the Daily Allowance admissible under the rules for halts outside the State or

1 and 3/5 fare whichever is greater.  In cases where the steamer company has

two rates of fare, one inclusive and one exclusive of diet, the word ‘fare’ in

this rule should be held to mean fare exclusive of diet.

27.       In cases of doubt or in which, owing to the arrangement of classes on a

steamer, the provisions of Rule 25 if strictly construed involve hardship,

Government may decide, for journeys generally or for particular journeys, to

what  class  of  accommodation    an  officer  is  entitled,  and  whether  if  a

concession is sanctioned, he should be granted the full allowance admissible

for the higher class in which he is permitted to travel.

28.         The rules in this sub-section apply to officers who cross a river or arm of the

sea by steamer in the course of a journey unless such crossing occurs during

a railway journey and the charge for it is included in the railway fare.  In the

latter case, the crossing is treated as part of the railway journey.

29.           If suitable accommodation on a Government vessel is offered to an officer, he

is entitled to Travelling Allowance under Rule 109 and not to mileage allowance.

216

CHAP I ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULES 29-31

It is not open to him to refuse to accept such accommodation and to draw

mileage allowance.

 SUB-SECTION  IV
Mileage  Allowance  For  Journeys  By  Road

30.          For the purpose of these rules travelling by road includes travelling by sea or

river in a steam launch or in any vessel other than a steamer and travelling by

canal.

31.          * For journeys by road, mileage allowance is admissible at the following rates for
each kilometre travelled irrespective of whether the places are connected by rail

or not :

                 (i)   Officers of the First Grade

                   (ii)    Officers of the Second Grade

               (iii)   Officers of the Third Grade

               (iv)   Officers of the Fourth Grade

:

:

:

:

36  paise  per  kilometre  if  the

journey  is  performed  by  public
conveyance.

28 paise per kilometre

24 paise per kilometre

20 paise per kilometre

                [This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st

September 1995].

              *Second paragraph: omitted

                [This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st

December 1989].

              † For journeys by public conveyance by road, officers will be paid actual
bus fare plus incidental expenses as admissible under Para 1 of Rule 110.

*[G O(P) No. 391/2002/Fin., Dated 19/06/2002]
†[G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated 29/03/1989]

217

CHAP I ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULE 31

Grade I and II Officers will be entitled to travel by Express bus and Grade
III and IV Officers by Fast Passenger bus.  In emergent cases,  with the
permission of the Controlling Officers, Grade III and IV Officers can
perform journeys in Express buses and claim Travelling Allowance on
that basis.  The existing provision  for claiming road mileage for journeys
by rail or road, irrespective of whether the places are connected by rail or
not, will continue.

                Effective from 1st September, 1985.

  Note 1.-  With effect from 1st November 1979, only officers of the First Grade
are allowed to travel by special conveyance and claim higher mileage.
With effect from 1st September, 1985 First  Grade Officers in receipt of
actual pay of ````` 2250  and above only are allowed to travel by special
conveyance and claim higher mileage.  An officer of the First Grade
claiming the higher mileage will note in his Travelling Allowance bill
concerned the registration number of the special conveyance used by
him.

  Note 2.- Officers of the First Grade claiming mileage at the higher rate shall
furnish the following certificate in their Travelling Allowance bills,
namely :-

             “I certify that I did not perform the road journeys for which mileage
allowance  has  been  claimed  at  the  higher  rate  by  any  public
conveyance which plies regularly for hire between fixed points and
charge fixed rates.  I also certify that the journey was not performed
in any other vehicle without payment of its hire charges or without
incurring its running charges.”

  Note 3.-  An officer of the First Grade claiming higher road mileage for a
journey performed in his own car shall furnish the following certificate
in lieu of the certificate referred to in Note 2 above, namely:-

218

CHAP I ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULE 31

  “I certify that the road journeys for which mileage has been claimed at the

higher rate were performed by me in my own car”.

  Note 4.- All officers claiming road mileage should record in their Travelling

Allowance bills one of the following certificates as may be appropriate,

namely :-

 (a)  “Certified that I have not been provided with any Government

conveyance for my use”.

Or

 (b)   “Certified that the Government conveyance provided for my use

was out of order/not available for journeys on ….(dates to be

specified).”

  Explanation.- In the case of non-gazetted officers, the drawing officers shall

record the certificate with suitable changes and the controlling officer

shall  ensure  that  the  Government  servants  who  are  provided  with

Government conveyance use such conveyance for their official journeys

and that otherwise, the prescribed certificate is recorded invariably.

  Note  5.- When two or more officers travel in a conveyance belonging to one

of them or hired by one of them,  the officer who owns or hires the

conveyance may draw Travelling Allowance as if he travelled alone

and the other officer (s) may draw only the Travelling Allowance as

admissible under Rule 107 read with Rule 110, even if he (they) meets

(meet) a portion of the cost of propulsion of the conveyance or of the

hire charges of the conveyance, as the case may be.  A certificate in the

following form shall also be attached to the Travelling Allowance bills

of the officers claiming travelling  allowance  under the above provision,

namely:-

219

CHAP I ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULE 31

            “Certified that I/We

            (1)   Name and Designation ………………………………….

            (2)   Name and designation …………………………………

            (3)   Name and designation …………………………………

 (4)   Name and designation travelled together from ………

………to ……………… on …………………………… in a special

conveyance (here enter Registration No. of the vehicle) owned/

hired by the officer whose name is mentioned as No………. above,

and that I have claimed Travelling Allowance admissible under

Note 5 below Rule 31, Kerala Service Rules, Part II.”

   Note 6.-  An Officer who performs a journey by a conveyance owned by

another officer without meeting the cost of its use and propulsion but

whose own conveyance immediately precedes or follows him is  eligible

for the mileage allowance admissible under the rules.  He shall, when

he  claims  mileage  allowance  certify  that  the  cost  of  the  use  and

propulsion of his conveyance which immediately preceded or followed

the conveyance by which he travelled was met by him.

    Note  7.-If  an  Officer  of  the  First  Grade,  travels  more  than  two  hundred

kilometres a day by special conveyance, the rate of mileage admissible

for the excess over two hundred kilometres will be reduced to three

fourths of what is normally admissible.

               Government Decision No. 1

               *If an Officer has to perform long journeys, he may be allowed to perform the

journeys in more than one day subject to the condition that the halt should

be  made only after the officer has made a march of not less than two hundred

kilometres in aday.  In cases where the journey commences late in the day,

*[G O(MS) No. 454/1961/Fin., Dated 06/11/1961]

220

CHAP I ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULE 31

halts may also be made after marches of less than two hundred kilometres.  In

all such cases of long journeys the  restriction regarding the mileage in the

above note will be applied only inrespect of each day’s journey.  No daily

allowance  either  full  or  half  will  be  admissible  to  the  Officer  for  such

intermediate halts.

              Government Decision No. 2

              †Effective from 1st  November, 1959.

  Note 8.- For journeys performed by foot between places not connected by
any public conveyance, Officers of the First Grade shall be given mileage

at the rate applicable for journeys by special conveyance and officers

of the other grades shall be given mileage at the rate of 35 paise per

kilometre.  An Officer claiming mileage in such cases should certify

that he performed the journey entirely by walking, and the officer who
countersigns the Travelling Allowance bill shall countersign the above

certificate also.

  Note 9.- A First Grade Officer, with a staff car attached to him or his office

should not engage a special conveyance for his journeys, if the staff

car  is  available.  The  following  procedure  should  be  observed  if

such an Officer claims higher mileage in his Travelling Allowance

bills namely:-

   (i)     If the bill requires countersignature,  the countersigning authority

shall  countersign  it  only  after  satisfying  himself  that  the

departmental vehicle was not available for the journey and shall

record a certificate to that effect in the bill.

  (ii)    If the bill does not require countersignature, a certificate should

be attached to the bill signed by the head of the Office or the

†[G O(Ms) No. 486/1961/Fin., Dated 02/12/1961]

221

CHAP I ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULE 31

Officer-in-charge of the departmental vehicle to the effect that the

vehicle was not available for the journey for which special mileage

is claimed.

  Note 10.- Autorickshaws, Motor Cycles, Scooters and Mopeds will not

be considered as special conveyances, and no higher rate of mileage

will be allowed for journeys performed by such vehicle.

          With effect from 1st September, 1985 Grade I and Grade II Officers are
entitled for special mileage allowance at the rate of 30 paise per kilometre
for journeys for public purpose by motor cycle or Scooter owned  and

maintained  by  them.   As  in  the  case  of  special  mileage  for  car,  the

registration number of the Motor cycle or Scooter should be recorded

in the bill claiming T.A., at the special rate allowed for such journeys.

               Government Decision No. 3

             *Half daily allowance will be admissible for intermediate halts beyond 200

kilometres when the journey is performed in departmental vehicles.

               Government Decision No. 4

               **The above note should be deemed to apply only to journeys performed by

road.  ‘The  nature  of  conveyance’  referred  to  in  the  note  is  intended  to

differentiate  between ‘Public conveyance’ and ‘Special conveyance’ and not

between  different modes of journeys, such as journey by road or journey by

rail. The note above therefore allows higher mileage only for journeys on

transfer between places not connected by rail.

               Rule 66, Part II, does not permit an officer to draw road mileage for journeys
on transfer performed between places connected by rail as the term “Mileage

allowance” as defined in Rule 12, Part II, relates not to ‘road mileage’ alone.

*[G O(P) No. 756/1978/Fin., Dated 16/10/1978]

**[Circular No. 43959/EB4/Fin., Dated 19/11/1962]

222

CHAP I ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULES 32-34

32.          The Government may, for special reasons to be recorded, allow to a particular
officer or grade of officers, mileage allowance at a higher  rate than is prescribed
in Rule 31.

33.           In  calculating  mileage  allowance  for  journeys  by  road,  fractions  of  a
kilometre should be omitted from the total of a bill for any one journey
but not from the various items which make up the bill.

        SUB - SECTION  V

Mileage  Allowance  for  Journeys  by  Air.

34.         † An officer authorised to travel by air is entitled to mileage allowance equal
to one standard air fare plus an allowance for incidental expenses at one-fifth
of the standard air fare subject to a minimum of one daily  allowance and
maximum of five times the daily allowance at the ordinary rate for each single
journey, each single journey being defined as the journey from starting point
to destination or vice versa.

  Note 1.- All first grade officers are authorised to travel by plane, Officers
belonging  to  the  other  grades  should  take  the  prior  sanction  of
Government for air journeys. Provided that one member  of the personal
Staff of Ministers, irrespective of the grade, shall be entitled to travel
by air to accompany the Minister in case of necessity.

  *(This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force from 1st December

1990)

  # Note 2.-  When an officer performs both rail and air journeys on the same
day he will be allowed to draw the actual incidental expenses at the
prescribed rates subject to a minimum of one daily allowance for both
the air  and rail journeys together.

† [G O(P) No. 197/1966/Fin., Dated 11/05/1966]

*[G O(P) No. 391/2002/Fin., Dated 19/06/2002]
# [G O(P) No. 416/1966/Fin., Dated 13/09/1966]

223

CHAP I ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULE 34

  Note 3.- The incidental expenses are limited to the following ceiling:-

             (i)   First Grade Officers                       *`````  85

            (ii)   Second  Grade (a) Officers-        *`````  60

           (iii)   Second Grade (b) Officers           *`````  45

           (iv)  Third Grade Officers                    *`````  35

            (v)   Fourth Grade Officers                  *`````  30

              *[This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect

from1st September 1995.]

               Government Decision No. 1

              # The following classification is prescribed in respect of various officers for
purposes of air travel while performing official duty journeys, where two
classes of tickets are available :-

Class of Officers

Class of air travel

                 (i)   Officers drawing a pay of ````` 2,250  per

Standard  (First)  Class

month and above.

                  (ii)  Officers  drawing  a  pay  between

````` 1,800 and ````` 2,249 per month

           (iii) Officers other than those falling
under (i) and (ii) above

*[G O(P) No. 391/2002/Fin., Dated 19/06/2002]
# [G O(P) No. 16/1964/Fin., Dated  09/01/1964]

224

Standard  (First)  class  where  the
journey  involves  night  travel;
otherwise  Tourist  Class.

For  this  purpose  ‘Night’  means

the time between 6 p.m. and 6 a.m.
In  case  part  of  the  journey  is

performed  during  night,  standard

(First) class will be admissible for

the  entire  journey.

Tourist  class.

CHAP I ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULE 34

                Government Decision No. 2

                * The Chairman and Members of the Kerala Public Service Commission will
be included along with officers of a pay of ` ` ` ` `  2,250 per mensem and above
for purposes of air travel.

               Government Decision No. 3

             † The taxes paid on inland and foreign air travels shall be reimbursed to the
State Government servants, in cases where the travel is on official business

and on public interest and where the expenditure on air fare itself is borne by
the Government, Officers may claim reimbursement of the tax paid by them in

the Travelling Allowance bills prepared for the particular journeys producing

receipts in token of having paid the tax.  The reimbursement of the tax will be

by  debit  to  the  same  head  of  account  to  which  the Travelling Allowance

claims of the officers are debited.

             This decision shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 15th
November 1971 and 15th October 1971 respectively, for inland air travel tax
and foreign air travel tax.

               Government Decision No. 4

          **The Governor,  Speaker, Deputy Speaker, Leader of the Opposition,

Ministers, Chief Secretary, Secretaries to Government and the following

Heads of Departments will be covered by Personal Accident Insurance

Policies on year to year basis.

               1.    Member,  Board of Revenue.

               2.    Chief Engineer.

               3.    Director of Health Services.

*[G O(Ms.) No. 586/1964/Fin., Dated 19/08/1964]
†[G O(P) No. 46/1973/Fin., Dated 12/02/1973]
** [G O(P) No. 531/1980/Fin., Dated 29/08/1980]

225

CHAP I ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULES 34-36

               4.    Director of Public Instruction.

               5.    Member, Planning Board.

               6.    Director of Technical Education.

               7.    Director of Collegiate Education.

               8.    Chief Electrical Inspector.

               9.    Director of Ports.

              10.   Chief Town Planner.

              11.   Inspector General of Police.

                 In respect  of others who travel by air on Government business they will take

Air  Insurance  Coupons  from Air  Port  (Rupees  ten  for  a  compensation  of

Rupees one lakh).  This amount will be reimbursed to them along with the

T.A. claims.

35.          An Officer who is not authorised to travel by air but who performs a

journey  by  air  on  tour  can  draw  only  the  Travelling Allowance  to

which he would have been entitled if he had travelled by rail, road or

steamer.

36.        If available, return tickets at reduced rates should always be purchased

when an officer expects to perform the return journey by air within the

period during which a  return ticket is available.  The mileage allowance

for  the  forward  and  the  return  journeys  when  such  return  tickets  are

available will, however, be the actual cost of the return ticket plus 2/5 of

the standard air fare for a single journey between the two places.

  * Note.- The incidental expenses for each single journey will be limited to the

ceilings prescribed in note 3 under rule 34.

*[G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated 29/03/1989]

226

CHAP I ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULES 36-39

               Government Decision

            * The cancellation charges of air tickets shall be reimbursed to officers
who have booked their tickets for official journeys in case they could not
undertake the journeys due to circumstances beyond their control.

                The Government servant should record a certificate as follows in the T.A. Bill
for  the  claim.  Certified  that  reservation  of  journey  ticket  made  as  per
reservation ticket No........... on................was cancelled due to exigencies of
public  service.

SECTION VI

DAILY  ALLOWANCE

37.           A  daily  allowance  is  a  uniform  allowance  for  each  day  of  absence  from
headquarters, which is intended to cover the ordinary  daily charge incurred
by an officer in consequence of such absence.

38.         Unless in any case it be otherwise expressly provided in these rules, a daily
allowance may be drawn while on tour by every officer whose duties require
that he should travel, and may not be drawn except while on tour.

39.         Daily allowance is admissible on the following scale :-

                (i)   Officers of the First Grade                      † ````` 70 a day

               (ii)   Officers of the Second Grade (a)           † ````` 55 a day

              (iii)   Officers of the Second  Grade (b)          † ````` 40 a day

              (iv)   Officers of the Third Grade

           † ````` 35 a day

               (v)   Officers of the Fourth Grade

           † ````` 25 a day

              † [This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect

from 1st September  1995]

* [G O(P) No. 141/1977/Fin., Dated 10/05/1977]

† [G O(P) No. 391/2002/Fin., Dated 19/06/2002]

227

CHAP I ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULES 39-41

             *Provided that an officer, who while on tour is provided with free boarding

and lodging, may draw only one fourth of the daily allowance admissible to

him at the station concerned; if only boarding is provided free to such an

officer he may draw daily allowance at one-half of the admissible rate; if only

lodging is provided free, he may draw daily allowance at two-thirds of the

admissible rate.

   Note 1.-  Daily Allowance is calculated on the actual pay the officers are in

receipt of, and with reference  to the grade  to which they belong.

   *Note 2.- If a Government servant who stays during tours in circuit houses,
inspection bungalows, rest houses, etc., is required to pay any charges

on account of stay at such places, even though it may not cover the

entire cost of the facilities provided, no reduction in the daily allowance

will be made.

40.          The Government may, for reasons which should be recorded and on such

conditions as they may think fit to impose, sanction for any officer or

class of officers, a daily allowance higher or lower than that prescribed in

Rule 39, if they consider that the allowance so prescribed is inadequate

or excessive.

SECTION VII

 ACTUAL  EXPENSES

41.           Unless in any case it be otherwise expressly provided in these rules, no officer

is entitled to be provided with means of conveyance by or at the expense of

Government, or to draw as Travelling Allowance the actual cost or part of the

actual cost of travelling.

* [G O(P) No. 426/1966/Fin., Dated 17/09/1966]

228

CHAP II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULES 42-43

CHAPTER  II

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCE  FOR  DIFFERENT
KINDS  OF  JOURNEY

SECTION I
 GENERAL

42.           The  Travelling Allowance  admissible  to  an  officer  for  any  journey  is

calculated with reference to the purpose of the journey in accordance

with the rules laid down in Sections II to XI of this Chapter.

  Note 1.-  When an officer who is permitted on his own request to attend

meetings  or  conferences  or  congresses  held  in  India  and  if  any

Government interest is served thereby, he may be paid (under specific

orders  of  Government)  a  single  railway  fare  of  the  class  of

accommodation to which he is entitled under these rules for the journey

each way, without any road mileage or daily allowance for halt, at the

place of meeting.

   Travelling and daily allowances under these rules, are however, admissible

when an officer is officially   sent to attend  a conference, congress or

meeting.

  Note 2.-  The officers of Government travelling on University business will

receive Travelling Allowance direct from the University according to

its rules.

  Note 3.-  An officer as a member of a Staff Council shall be eligible for Travelling

Allowance  and Daily Allowance as on  tour for the journeys performed

by him for attending  the Staff Council Meeting and back.

43.            Unless in any case it be otherwise expressly provided in these rules, an officer

making a journey for any purpose is not entitled to recover from Government

the cost of transporting his family or his personal luggage, conveyances and

camp equipage.

229

CHAP II ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULE 44

44.            The Government may, by general or special order, direct that the ordinary

rates of daily allowance or mileage allowance or both shall be increased

either in a definite ratio or in any other suitable manner for any or all

officers travelling in any specified locality in which travelling is unusually

expensive.

  Note 1.-When travelling in hilly tracts, officers are entitled to draw an additional

25 per cent of the daily allowance or mileage allowance ordinarily

admissible to them in Class I  tracts and 12 ½  per cent   thereof in Class

II tracts.   Appendix  IX gives the list of Class I and Class II hilly tracts.

               Ruling No. 1

               A Government servant whose headquarters is situated in a special tract and

who undertakes a journey from headquarters and returns thereto on the same

day, is not entitled to the higher rate of daily allowance applicable for halts in

the special tract irrespective of whether the journey is performed entirely in

the special tract or partly in the special and partly in the ordinary tract.

               Ruling No. 2

            A Government servant whose headquarters is situated in a hilly tract may

claim half daily allowance admissible under Rule 63 for the day of arrival at

and for the day of departure from  a place in Class  I or II hilly tract at the

enhanced  rates  applicable  to  the  class  of  the  hilly  tract  where  he  halted,

provided his absence from the headquarters exceeded eight hours.

                This ruling shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 20th July

1960.

               Ruling No. 3

                  *The area between Dehra Dun and Mussorie in Uttar Pradesh will be treated

as Class I hilly tract for purposes of Note 1 to Rule 44, Part II, K.S.R.

* [G O(Rt.) No. 787/1961/DD., Dated 09/10/1961]

230

CHAP II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULES 44-46

  Note 2.- The rate of daily allowance of an officer who spends part of a day in
a hilly tract and part in a place to which the ordinary rates apply is
determined according to the place where he halts after the journey.

   Note 3.- Officers travelling or halting outside the State may be given daily

allowance at the following  rates :-

             (i)  Officers of the First Grade                     † ````` 100 a day

            (ii)  Officers of the Second Grade (a)          † ````` 70 a day

           (iii)  Officers of the Second Grade (b)         † ````` 60 a day

           (iv)  Officers of the Third Grade                  † ````` 55 a day

           (v)   Officers of the Fourth Grade                † ````` 35 a day

  †(This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from

1st September 1995.)

45.         When an officer of a grade lower than the first grade is required by the order
of a superior authority  to travel by special means of conveyance, the cost of
which  exceeds  the  amount  of  the  daily  allowance  or  mileage  allowance,
admissible to him under the ordinary rules he may draw the actual cost of
travelling in lieu of such daily or mileage allowance.  The bill for the actual
cost must be supported by a certificate, signed by the superior authority and
countersigned by the controlling officer, stating that the use of the special
means  of  conveyance  was  absolutely  necessary  and  specifying  the
circumstances which rendered it necessary.

SECTION II

JOURNEYS ON TOUR

SUB-SECTION  I

General Rules

46.       The headquarters of an officer shall be in such place as Government may

prescribe.

†[G O(P) No. 391/2002/Fin., Dated  19/06/2002]

231

CHAP II ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULES 47-49

47.        The Government may define the limits of the sphere of duty of any officer.

  †Note 1.- The Heads of Departments and District Collectors are empowered
to sanction journeys of subordinate officers to the adjoining districts

of neighbouring States.

            Effective from 30th August 1979.

  Note 2.- The Heads of Departments and District Collectors will be competent

to undertake journeys outside the State in the adjoining districts of

neighbouring States in public interest.

  #  Note  3.-  The  Board  of  Revenue  is  empowered  to  sanction  journeys  of
Potdars outside the State accompanying remittances to the Reserve

Bank  of  India  agencies  in  accordance  with  instructions  from  the

Currency Officer.

         Effective from 14th February 1962.

  Note 4.- The Inspector-General of Police is empowered to sanction the journeys

outside the State of all officers of his department below the rank of

Assistant Superintendent of Police/Deputy Superintendent of Police.

*He is also empowered to sanction journeys outside the State of all

officers below the rank of Superintendent of Police in the Crime Branch

in connection with investigation of cases.

48.           An officer is on tour when absent on duty from his headquarters either within

or, with proper sanction beyond his sphere of duty.

49.         In case of doubt the Government may decide whether particular absence is

absence on duty for the purpose of Rule 48.

†[G O(P) No. 454/1980/Fin., Dated 16/07/1980]
# [G O(Ms.) No. 157/Rev., Dated 14/02/1962]

* [G O(P) No. 440/1967/Fin., Dated  05/10/1967]

232

CHAP II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULES 50-53

50.        The Government may impose such restrictions as it may think fit, upon the
frequency and duration of journeys to be made on tour by any officer or
class of officers.

51.           If the Government declares that the pay of a particular officer or class of
officers has been so fixed as to compensate for the cost of all journeys,
other than journeys by rail or steamer, within the officer’s sphere of duty,
such  an  officer  may  draw  no Travelling Allowance  for  such  journeys
though he may draw mileage allowance, for journey by rail or steamer.
When  travelling  on  duty,  with  proper  sanction  beyond  his  sphere  of
duty, he may draw Travelling Allowance calculated under the ordinary
rules for the entire journeys, including such part of it as is within his
sphere of duty.

52.        The Travelling Allowance drawn by an officer on tour ordinarily takes the
shape of either Permanent Travelling Allowance or daily allowance, if either
of these is admissible to him.  Permanent Travelling Allowance and daily
allowance may, however, in certain circumstances, be exchanged for mileage
allowance or for the whole or part of the actual cost of travelling.  In certain
other circumstances, actual cost may be drawn in addition to daily allowance
or for journeys for which no daily  allowances is admissible.

SUB-SECTION  II

Officers in Receipt of Permanent

Travelling  Allowance

53.           A Permanent Travelling Allowance is intended to cover the cost of all journeys
within the sphere of duty of the officer who draws it, and such an officer may
not draw any other Travelling Allowance in place of or  in addition to Permanent
Travelling Allowance for such journeys provided that:

               (1)   a class of officers to whom Government may extend this concession
may draw, in addition to Permanent Travelling Allowance single fare
for a journey by rail, and

233

CHAP II ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULES 53-54

             (2)   the Government may, by general or special order, permit an officer
whose sphere of duty extends beyond the limits of a single district
to draw, in addition to Permanent Travelling Allowance, whenever
his  actual  travelling  expenses  for    a  duly  authorised  journey  by
public  conveyance  exceed  double  the    amount  of  his  Permanent
Travelling Allowance for the period occupied in such journey, the
difference between such double Permanent Travelling Allowance
and the mileage allowance calculated for the journey.

54.           When an officer in receipt of Permanent Travelling Allowance travels on duty,
with  proper  sanction,  beyond  his  sphere  of  duty,    he  may  exchange  his
Permanent Travelling Allowance for the mileage allowance for the entire
journey including such part of it as is within his sphere of duty and may draw
in addition Permanent Travelling Allowance for any day of his absence for
which he doesnot draw mileage allowance.  This rule does not apply to an
officer who travels beyond his sphere of duty in the course of a journey from
one  place  within  that  sphere  to  another  such  place,  or  to  an  officer  who
makes, by road alone, a journey not exceeding 32 kilometres.

  Note.-  All officers in receipt of Permanent Travelling Allowance will be allowed
to  exchange  Permanent  Travelling  Allowance  for  regular  Daily
Allowance for days of halt at places outside the area of jurisdiction for
the performance of official duty at such places under specific orders of
competent authority subject to the normal rules for the drawal of Daily
Allowance.

                          The above benefit will also be extended to officers who are in receipt of
Permanent Travelling Allowance and who are deputed for training at an
outstation beyond their area of jurisdiction.

                      The amendment in the first paragraph shall be deemed, to have come
into force with effect from December 15, 1970 and that in the second
para from January 15, 1971.

234

CHAP II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULES 54-56

                Government Decision.

              *Deduction of proportionate Permanent  Travelling Allowance for the day
on which Permanent  Travelling Allowance is exchanged for mileage allowance
will be made in accordance with the formula specified below.

If ‘X’ is the number of days of tour performed in a month (i.e., including
the  days  for  which  Permanent Travelling Allowance  is  exchanged  for
mileage)  and  ‘Y’  the  number  of  days  on  tour  for  which  Permanent
Travelling Allowance is exchanged for mileage,  Permanent Travelling
Allowance to be deducted will be  Y/X x PTA admissible  for the month
for ‘X’ days of tour.

(Permanent Travelling Allowance admissible for  ‘X’ days has to be calculated
in accordance with the Decision No. 2 under Rule 6, Kerala Service Rules,

Part II.)

  SUB-SECTION  III

   Officers Not In Receipt Of Permanent
Travelling   Allowance

 SUB DIVISION  I
 Daily Allowance

55.         Except where otherwise expressly provided in these rules, an officer not in
receipt of Permanent Travelling Allowance draws Travelling Allowance for
journeys on tour in the shape of daily allowance.

56.            Daily allowance may not be drawn except during absence from headquarters
on duty.  A period of absence from headquarters begins  when an officer
actually leaves his headquarters and ends when he actually returns to the
place in which his headquarters are situated whether he halts there or not.

  Note.- If an officer of a vacation department combines tour with vacation i.e.
proceeds  on  tour  and  avails  of  vacation  without  returning  to  his

*[G O(P) No. 370/1967/Fin., Dated 18/08/1967]

235

CHAP II ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULES 56-57

headquarters, he should be granted tour Travelling Allowance under

these rules for the onward journey only.

             Ruling

                *When two journeys are performed within a period of 24 hours, the period of

absence from headquarters will be treated as one day irrespective of the fact

that the journey was performed on two calendar days and the drawal of daily

allowance will be regulated accordingly.

57.        †Daily allowance may not be drawn for any day on which a Government
servant does not reach a point outside a radius of eight kilometres from

the duty point (i.e. the place or office of employment) at his headquarters

or return to it from a similar point.

  Note 1.- The term ‘radius of eight kilometres’ means a distance of eight

kilometres  by  the  shortest  route  by  which  a  person  can  reach  his

destination by the ordinary modes of travel.

              Government Decision

           # In the case of an Officer having his headquarters at Ernakulam, no daily

allowance is admissible for journey to Mattancherry/Fort Cochin and vice

versa, as he does not reach a point outside the radius of 8 Kms. This takes

effect from 16th March 1964.

  Note 2.- The Malabar Special Police and the District Armed Reserve Personnel

stationed at Malappuram who have to halt for a period of ten days at

Melmuri Rifle Range situated within eight kilometres from Malappuram

*[G O(P) No. 405/1965/Fin., Dated  18/10/1965]

†[G O(P) No. 16/1965/Fin., Dated  06/01/1965]

# [Circular Memo No. 92/1964/EB4/Fin., Dated  24/10/1964  and
G O(P) No. 129/1965/Fin., Dated 08/04/1965]

236

CHAP II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULES 57-58

in connection with the annual firing course there, shall be exempted

from the operation of the above rule.

  * Note 3.-  Civilian staff of N.C.C. Department attending N.C.C. Camps within

a radius of eight kilometres from their headquarters shall be exempted

from the operation of the above rule.

        This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect

from 1st April 1960.

58.         Subject to the conditions laid down in Rules 59 and 60, daily allowance may

be drawn during a halt on tour or on a holiday occurring during a tour.

   Note 1.-   An officer who takes casual leave while on tour is not entitled to

draw daily allowance during such leave.

   Note 2.-   Daily allowance is not admissible for any day, whether Sunday or

holiday, unless the officer is actually and not merely constructively in

camp.

  †Note 3.- In the case of enforced halt occurring en route on tour journeys
necessitated by break down of communication due to blockade of roads

and railways on account of floods, rains, landslides and other acts of

God  or  delayed  journeys  or  cancellations  of  schedules  of  motor

conveyances, trains or air crafts, such periods of halts shall be treated

as duty and the Government servant granted daily allowance at three-

fourths of the rate applicable to him at the station in which the enforced

halt takes place for the entire period of enforced halt after excluding the

first day of such halt for which no daily allowance shall be allowed.

Government in the Administrative Department in respect of Heads of

Departments  and  the  Heads  of  Departments  in  the  case  of  their

* [G O(P) No. 248/1980/Fin., Dated 17/04/1980]
† [G O(P) No. 254/1967/Fin., Dated  29/06/1967]

237

CHAP II ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULES 58-59

subordinate  officers  will  be  the  authority  competent  to  declare  the
periods of enforced halts as duty.

  Note  4.-  In respect of journeys involving an overnight halt at an intermediate
station either due to non-availability of connecting service or due to
the cancellation of connecting air service, half daily allowance will be
allowed  at  the  rate  applicable  to  the  intermediate  station  for  each
overnight halt (in addition to the allowance for incidental expenses
admissible for air journeys) if the Indian Airlines Corporation does not
provide at its expense any facility for boarding and lodging.  Half Daily
Allowance  will  also  be  given  for  similar  enforced  halts  occurring
between air and  rail/road journeys on duty.

           The above amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with

effect from 24th December, 1970.

  *Note  5.-  No daily allowance is admissible to a Government servant for the

day on which he avails himself of a restricted holiday while on tour.

59.         A daily allowance may not be drawn for more than ten days of a halt at one
place.  But Heads of Departments in the case of their subordinates and the
Government in the case of Heads of Departments, may grant exemption from
the operation of this rule where they are satisfied :-

                  (a)     that prolonged halts are necessary in the interest of the public service, and

              (b)   that such halts necessitate the maintenance of camp equipage, or
where no camp equipage is maintained entail extra expense on the
officer after the first ten days.

                        In such cases the daily allowance admissible will be -

                        (a)    full rate for the first ten days;

                        (b)    three-fourth rate for the next 20 days; and

                        (c)    half-rate thereafter.

* [G O(P)No. 254/1967/Fin., Dated 29/06/1967]

238

CHAP II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULE 59

               But no allowance will be given for halts exceeding three months.

    ^,*Note  1.-  Officers  deputed  for  training  to  Trivandrum,  Ernakulam,

Kozhikkode, and city outside the state of Kerala shall be paid daily

allowance at full rate for the first 30 days and at ¾  of the rate for the

next 60 days, in relaxation of the restriction imposed in the above rule.

           †This Rule shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st

August, 1982.

  # Explanation.- This note shall apply to the officers deputed for training
to Delhi, Bombay and Calcutta with effect from the 1st December, 1978

and to those deputed for training to other cities outside the State with

effect from 10th July 1979.

  Note  2.-  Periods of absence on leave (including casual leave) will be included

in computing the limits prescribed in this rule.

  Exception.-The Circle Commander, No. 11 Circle Cadet Corps, Trivandrum

will  be  competent  to  sanction  Daily Allowance  under  the  above

rule, to the civilian staff of the establishment of the National Cadet

Corps deputed for duty to camps.

             This exception shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from

20th October 1962.

               Ruling No. 1

               The sanction of competent authority for admitting daily allowance in excess

of ten days would be necessary only when the number of full daily allowances

* [G O(P) No. 837/1978/Fin., Dated  01/12/1978]

^ [G O(P) No. 1027/1979/Fin., Dated 23/11/1979]

† [G O(P) No. 416/1983/Fin., Dated 20/07/1983]
# [G O(P) No. 588/1980/Fin., Dated 11/09/1980]

239

CHAP II ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULES 59-61

drawn inclusive of the half daily allowance under Rule 63 exceeds ten; but the
daily or half daily allowances, if any, admissible for the days of travel covered
by Rule 60 (c) should be excluded in calculating the daily allowances.

               Ruling No. 2

           Daily allowance will be allowed for the first three months at the rates
specified  in  this  rule  even  in  cases  of  halts  on  tour  exceeding  three
months.

60.         For the purposes of Rules 57 to 59

                 (a)    After a continuous halt of ten days’ duration, the halting place shall be

regarded as the officer’s temporary headquarters.

             (b)  A halt is continuous unless terminated  by an absence on duty at a
distance from the halting place exceeding eight kilometres for a period
including not less than three nights.

               (c)   In calculating the duration of a halt, any day on which the officer
travels or halts at a distance from the halting place exceeding eight
kilometres shall be excluded. On such a day the officer may draw
daily allowance or exchange it for mileage allowance, if admissible.

    Note.-  If  an  officer  proceeds  on  earned  leave  after  a  halt  on  duty  at  an
outstation and on termination of the leave resumes duty directly at the
same halting station and remains thereon halt for some more days, the
absence on leave should not be treated as interruption of halt, but the
whole period should be treated as one continuous spell of halt, leaving
out the leave period from the calculation of daily allowance.

SUB DIVISION  II

Mileage  Allowance  and  Actual  Expenses  in  Place  of
or in  Addition  to  Daily  Allowance

61.         The Government may by general or special order and on such conditions as
they think fit to impose, permit any officer, or class of officers to draw mileage

240

CHAP II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULES 61-62

allowance  instead  of  daily  allowance  for  the  whole  period  of  any

absence  from  headquarters,  if  they  consider  that  the  nature  of  the

officer’s duty is such that daily allowance is not sufficient to cover

his travelling expenses.

62.   (a)   Subject to any conditions which Government may by general or special order

impose, an officer may exchange his daily allowance for mileage allowance

on any day on which -

                 (i)    he travels by railway or steamer or plane or by any two of them or

by all of them;

                  (ii)     he travels more than 32 kilometres by road, provided that, if a continuous

journey extends over more than one day, the exchange must be made for

all such days and not for a part only of them.

   Note .-  Short journeys within a radius of eight kilometres from headquarters

may  not  be  added  to  other  journeys,  when  calculating  the  distance

travelled by road or the amount of mileage allowance admissible for

road journeys.

      *(b)   When a journey by road is combined with a journey by railway or steamer or

plane under clause (i) of sub-rule (a) of this rule, mileage allowance may be

drawn on account of such journey by road, but such mileage will be limited to

the amount of daily allowance unless the journey by road exceeds thirty-two

kilometres.

  Note.-  If an officer halts at the outstation, and the place or places of duty

visited be within the radius of 8 kilometres road mileage should

always be from the Railway Station to the Chief Public Office, no

matter where he proceeds first to the temporary residence or the

place of duty.

*[G O(P) No. 16/1965/Fin., Dated 06/01/1965]

241

CHAP II ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULES 62-63

  Government Decision

                  *If  an  officer  performs  a  direct  journey  by  road  between  two  places
connected partly by road and partly by rail he will be entitled to T.A. at
the following rates.  Road mileage for the road portion upto the nearest
railway station plus road mileage at the rates as provided in Rule 21, Part
II, K.S.Rs for the portion connected by rail.

   Eg;  If an officer travels from Neyyattinkara to Quilon directly by road, he
will be entitled to the admissible road mileage for the distance from
Neyyattinkara to Trivandrum which is connected by road only and
from Trivandrum to Quilon which is connected by rail at the rates as
provided in Rule 21, K.S.R., Part II.

63.          †Daily allowance for halt on tour at an outstation will be calculated on the
basis of the period of halt which will begin from the time the forward
journey  ends  at  the  outstation  and  will  end  at  the  time  the  return  or
further journey commences.  The rate of daily allowance will be calculated
as follows :-

              1.    Halt upto six hours

Nil

              2.    Halt exceeding six hours but not

   Half daily allowance

exceeding  twelve hours

            3.    Halt exceeding 12 hours but not

Full daily allowance

exceeding twenty four hours

                 4.     Halt exceeding twenty four hours

One daily allowance for every 24

hours.  For fraction of 24 hours at

the end of halt, daily allowance will

be calculated as indicated above.

*[G O(P) No. 115/1976/Fin., Dated 10/04/1976]

†[G O(P) No. 83/1968/Fin., Dated  23/02/1968]

242

CHAP II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULE 63

  Note 1.- This concession is also admissible to officers who are entitled to

daily allowance for halts on tour but whose journeys are regulated by

Rules 103, 105 and 107.

  *Note 2.- Officers and men of Fire Force Department are  exempted

from the operation of the above rule. They will be eligible to

draw full daily allowance whenever they make a journey to a

place more than 8 km. from the fire stations in fire service vehicles

in an emergency or to attend an ambulance call, irrespective of

time limit or absence.

               Government Decision.

              †(i)   The daily allowance admissible for halt at an outstation under this rule
and the daily/mileage allowance admissible for the journey should be

calculated separately, irrespective of whether the halt is preceded or

followed by a journey which qualifies for daily or mileage allowance.

                 (ii)    Rule 62 (a) refers to travelling by a Government servant on any day for

a total distance exceeding 32 kilometres.  The number of journeys in a

day or whether any one or more of the journeys exceed 32 kilometres or

whether each or the several journeys is less than 32 kilometres is not

material.  If the total travelling in a day exceeds 32 kilometres, he can

exchange daily allowance for mileage allowance.  If he does not so

exchange he gets only one daily allowance for that day to cover all the

journeys.

                    (iii)     Daily allowance for halt under this rule is to be calculated after computing

the total number of hours of halt at an outstation, irrespective of the total

number of days of halt and whether or not the daily allowance is exchanged

for mileage allowance.

*[G O(P) No. 266/1973/Fin., Dated  10/07/1973]
† [G O(P) No. 240/1978/Fin., Dated 06/03/1978]

243

CHAP II ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULES 63-64

                 (iv)     In a case whether the Government servant, while on tour returns on the

same day, to the first halting station from another outstation.  Daily

allowance, if admissible for the journey, may be exchanged for mileage

allowance, subject to the provisions of Rule 62 but in addition to this

allowance, no daily allowance for halt under Rule 63 is admissible even

if the halt at another outstation exceeds six hours.

              (v)     If a Government servant halts at more than one station on the  same day,

daily allowance for halt may be calculated after computing the total hours

spent on halt at all the outstations taken together.  This proviso applies
only if the halts at more than one station begin and terminate within the

duration of 24 hours.  If the duration of halt at the second station extends

beyond 24 hours from the commencement of halt at the first outstation,

daily allowance admissible for halt at the second station is to be reckoned

separately.

           *(vi)    When a Government servant, on tour, visits various outstations on duty

over a number of days, the total daily allowance admissible under this rule

should not exceed the total daily allowance calculated on the basis of the

total number of hours between the time of arrival at temporary residence

duty point at the first outstation and the time of departure from the temporary

residence/duty point at the last station of tour.

SUB DIVISION  III

Travelling  Allowance  Admissible for Journeys

 And Halts Within  Eight Kilometres

of Headquarters

64.         Government may, by general or special, order permit any officer or class of

officers to draw the actual  cost of hiring a conveyance on a journey for

which no Travelling Allowance is admissible under these rules.

* [G O(P) No. 321/1970/Fin., Dated   15/05/1970]

244

CHAP II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULE 64

   Note  1.- When a nongazetted or last grade officer is despatched on duty

to a place at some distance from his office, or is summoned to his office

by special order, of a gazetted officer outside the ordinary hours of

duty, the expenditure involved may be paid by Government and charged

to contingencies provided-

  (a)    That the head of the office certifies that the expenditure was actually

incurred,  was  unavoidable,  and  is  within  the  scheduled  scale  of

charges for the conveyance used.

  (b)    That the officer concerned is not entitled to draw Travelling Allowance

under the ordinary rules for the journey, and that he is not granted

any compensatory leave and does not and will not otherwise receive

any special remuneration for the performance of the duty which

necessitated the journey.

    Note  2.-  The  teaching  staff  in  all  Government  Training  Schools  and

Government Training Colleges who undertake journeys for practice

teaching will be paid allowance at the following rates per day for the

actual number of days on which they perform journeys for practice

teaching :-

  (i)   When the distance is less than two kilometres no conveyance

allowance will be allowed.

 (ii)   When the distance is two kilometres or more but less than four

kilometres -````` 2.

(iii)  When the distance is four kilometres or more but less than six

kilometres -  ````` 3.

(iv)  *When the distance is six kilometres or more and no regular

Travelling Allowance is admissible -````` 4.

*[G O(P) No. 145/1976/Fin., Dated  25/05/1976]

245

CHAP II ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULE 64

            * Effective from 1st April 1961.

  Note  3.- Last grade officers deputed for treasury transactions within a radius
of 8 kilometres will be paid an allowance at the rate of † ````` 5 per day by
debit  to  the  contingencies  of  the  Department  concerned,  when  the
distance to the treasury from the headquarters exceeds two kilometres
or more but does not exceed 8 kilometres subject to following :

  (i)  The allowance will be paid to such officers who are required
under Article 284 of the Kerala Financial Code, Volume I to be
engaged for cashing bills or remitting money into the treasuries
when they are required to carry ````` 500 or more.

 (ii)  The allowance will be paid only for journeys to or from the
treasury  which  actually  involve  the  carrying  of  money  and
not otherwise.

(iii)   The allowance will be paid only if no regular T.A. or other

remuneration is payable for the day.

(iv)  The allowance will not be paid for more than three visits in a

week with reference to a particular office.

 (v)    The allowance will be admissible only if the officer is using  his own
conveyance  or  engaging  one  for  hire,  if  conveyance  is  used  no
allowance will be payable.

(vi)   The payment of the allowance will be extended to cases in which
the officers have to travel more than two kilometres from the office
to the State Bank for collection and remittance of cash eventhough
the treasury is situated at a place within a distance of less than
two kilometres from the headquarters.

                      † Effective from 15th December 1980.

*[G O(Ms.) No. 403/Edn., Dated 17/07/1961 & G O(P) No. 468/1961/Fin., Dated 20/11/1961]
†[G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated 29/03/1989]

246

CHAP II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULES 64-65

  Explanation. -For the purpose of determining the distance of two kilometres
from headquarters, the duty point at the headquarters should be taken
as the place or office where the Government servant normally remains
on duty.

SECTION  III

 JOURNEYS ON TRANSFER

65.         Travelling Allowance may not be drawn under this section by an officer on
transfer from one station to another unless he is transferred for the public
convenience and is entitled to pay during the period occupied by the journey.
A  transfer  at  his  own  request  should  not  be  treated  as  a  transfer  for  the
public convenience unless the authority sanctioning the transfer, for special
reasons which should be recorded, otherwise direct.

  Note 1.- An officer appointed to a post under Government as a result of
selection by the Public Service Commission should be granted T. A. as
on  transfer  for  joining  the  post  if  he  already  holds  a  substantive
appointment under Government, the Government of India or any other
State Government.

  †Note 2.- The Travelling Allowance of officers for journeys on temporary
transfers and relieving duties of not more than two months’ duration
will,  however,  be  limited  to  the  allowances    that  would  have  been
admissible if such journeys were journeys on tour.  Daily allowance as
for halt on tour will also be allowed for halts, at the new temporary
headquarters in such cases.  When, however, the period of transfer is
subsequently  prolonged  to  more  than    two  months,  the  officer
concerned will be allowed to draw the Travelling Allowance otherwise
admissible for journeys on transfer, deducting that had been drawn
already.  Where, however, the amount already drawn is larger than
what is admissible for journeys on transfer, no refund need be made.

†[G O(P) No. 271/1964/Fin., Dated 14/05/1964]

247

CHAP II ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULES 65-67

 “Temporary transfer” means a transfer to duty in another station which is

expressed to be for a period not exceeding two months.

              Government Decision No.1

               *A transfer which is not specifically stated to be temporary will be treated as

permanent.  All transferring authorities in cases of temporary transfers of

relieving  duties  should  specify  in  the  order  of  transfer,  the  nature  of  the

transfer.

              Government Decision No. 2

              †In the case of temporary transfers all transferring authorities should specify
in the order itself that the transfer, is temporary not exceeding two months.

  Note  3.-  In  cases  where  husband  and  wife  are  both  State  Government

employees and one of them is transferred at the same time or within six

months of transfer of the other, from  one and the same old station to

one and the same new station, transfer T.A. will not be admissible to

both of them as independent Government servants.  Either of them will

be allowed to claim transfer  T.A. the other being treated as a member

of  his/her  family  not  in  the  State  Government’s  employment  on

furnishing the following certificate. :-

  ‘Certified that my wife/husband who is employed under the State Government

and who has been transferred from………… to ………… within six

months  of  my  transfer  has  not  already  claimed  any  transfer  T.A.

consequent on her/his transfer.’

66.         An Officer may draw mileage allowance for journey on transfer.

67. (a)    Unless in any case it be otherwise expressly provided in these rules, an officer

is entitled for a journey on transfer to the following:-

*[G O(Ms.)No. 484/1961/Fin., Dated  29/11/1961]
†[G O(Ms.) No. 272/1964/Fin., Dated  14/05/1964]

248

CHAP II ]

KERALA  SERVIC E RULES  PART  II

[ RULE 67

        I. FOR JOURNEYS BY RAIL OR STEAMER

                (i)      If the journey is by rail he may draw mileage allowance at twice the rate
applicable to him under sub-rule (a) of Rule 20 and if the journey is by
steamer three fares of the class of accommodation to which he is entitled,
the fares being limited to the lowest rate of such class of accommodation.
If the journey is actually performed by first class by a First Grade or
Second  Grade  Officer  and  the  necessary  certificate  to  this  effect  is
produced, the officer may claim a single railway fare and three times the
incidental expenses admissible to him under sub-rule (b) of Rule 20.

              (ii)     He may draw additional mileage allowance at the rate applicable to him
under Rule 20 or Rule 44 as the case may be, if two adult members of his
family accompany him, and at twice that rate if more than two members
accompany him.  If the journey is actually performed by first class by
members of the family accompanying a First Grade or Second Grade
Officer,  he may draw an extra fare for each adult member of his family for
whom full fare is actually paid and one half fare for each child for whom
such fare is actually paid.

             (iii)     He may draw the actual cost of carriage by goods train, steamer or

other craft, of personal effects upto the following maxima :-

 (a)  Officers whose actual pay
is **````` 3000 and above and
officers  belonging  to  the
All India Services.

 (b)    Officers whose actual pay is
**`````  2500    and    above  but
below  **````` 3000

2240 Kilograms

1120 Kilograms

                          (c)   All other officers

560 Kilograms

                                 ** effective from 1st September, 1995

**[G O(P) No. 202/2006/Fin., Dated  05/05/2006]

249

CHAP II ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULE 67

             In addition to the above concession, loading and unloading charges of
personal effects to officers transferred in public interests will be allowed
as specified below :-

              (1)  Officers of the First Category.— Actual charges for packing and loading of
personal effects at one end and for unloading and unpacking at other end
subject to a maximum of      * ````` 100 at each end.

                  (2)   Officers of the Second Category.—Actual charges for  the above purpose

subject to a maximum of * ````` 50 at each end.

                  (3)   Others.—Actual charges for the above purpose subject to a maximum

of * ````` 30 at each end.

                        *(This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect

from 1st September 1995).

   †Note 1.- In the case of journeys on transfer performed by First or Second
Grade Officers by Mail/Express Train and actual First class fares for
travel by such trains are claimed, a certificate to the effect that the
journey was performed by First class by Mail/Express Train should be
recorded by the claimant on the Travelling Allowance bill.

   Note 2.-  If an officer carries his personal effects by passenger instead of by
goods train he may draw the actual cost of carriage upto a limit of the
amount which would have been admissible had he taken the maximum
number of kilograms by goods train.

   Note 3.- An officer who carries his personal effects by road between places
connected by rail may draw actual charges upto the limit of the amount
which would have been admissible had he taken the same quantity by
goods train.  Loading and unloading charges as well as packing and

unpacking charges will be allowed in such cases also.  In cases where

*[G O(P) No. 391/2002/Fin., Dated 19/06/2002]
† [G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated 29/03/1989]

250

CHAP II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULE 67

the actual expenses claimed exceed the limit mentioned above, the
controlling authority may, for valid reasons, allow such claims subject
to the limit of the amount which would have been admissible, if the
maximum number of kilograms had been transported by goods train.

   Note 4.- The claim for transport of personal effects between places connected
partly by road and partly by rail shall be regulated as follows:-

  (1)     For the rail portion.- As in Rule 67 (a) I (iii) and Note 2   or 3 of Rule

67 (a) I (iii)

*(2)    For the road portion.- As in Rule 67 (a) II (iii).

              Ruling

            Places where a railway station is situated within eight kilometres from the
central point of the respective localities, will be treated as places connected
wholly by rail, for purposes of calculation of charges for transport of personal
effects on transfer.

  Note 5.- Subject to the prescribed maximum number of kilograms an officer
may  draw  the  actual  cost  of  transporting  personal  effects  to  his
new station from a  place other than his old station (e.g., from a
place where they are purchased en-route or have been left on the
occasion of a previous transfer) or from his old station to a place
other than his new station,  provided that the total amount drawn
including the cost of transporting these personal effects shall not
exceed  that  admissible  had  the  maximum  admissible  number  of
kilograms been transported by goods train from the old to the new
station direct.

                (iv)   Provided that –

  (1)   the distance travelled exceeds 150 kilometres;

*[G O(P) No. 311/1966/Fin., Dated 13/07/1966]

251

CHAP II ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULE 67

  (2)    the officer is travelling to join a post in which the possession of a

conveyance  is  advantageous  from  the  point  of  view  of  his

efficiency, or is travelling after being relieved from a post in which

the possession of a conveyance was advantageous from the point

of view of his efficiency; and

  (3)   Conveyances are actually carried by rail, steamer or other craft;

            he may draw the actual cost of transporting at owner’s risk conveyances, on

the following scales:-

       I    Grade Officers

A motor car.

              II   Grade Officers in receipt of actual

A motor car or a motor cycle.

pay of * `````  3000 and above

                  II    Grade Officers whose actual pay
is below * ````` 3000

A motor cycle.

                 III   Grade Officers

An ordinary cycle

                       *Effective from 1st September 1995

  Note 1.-  In the case of the motor car, the cost of transporting a chauffeur or

cleaner may  also be drawn.

              Ruling

              † When the officer transports his motor car by rail he may draw one railway
fare for III class  accommodation in respect of the chauffeur or cleaner, provided

he  certifies  that  the  chauffeur  or  cleaner  actually  travelled  by  rail  on  the

section for which the transportation charges of motor car by rail are claimed.

* [G O(P) No.391/2002/Fin., Dated 19/06/2002]

† [G O(P) No. 35/1964/Fin., Dated 20/01/1964]

252

CHAP II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULE 67

   Note 2.-  When an officer transports his motor car or motor cycle by road

under its own power between stations connected by rail or steamer or

partly by rail and partly by steamer he may draw an allowance of *14

paise per  kilometre in respect of the motor car and *7 paise per kilometre

in respect of the motor cycle, the distance to be reckoned for the purpose

of the concession being limited to the distance between the  stations

by rail or steamer or both combined, as the case may be.  If the officer

himself travels by car or motor cycle he may  draw the fares admissible

under clause (a)1 (i).  For any member of his family who travels by the
car or motor cycle, the officer may draw the extra fare or half fare which

should have been admissible under clause (a) I (ii) if the member had

travelled by rail or steamer.

  *Effective  from 1st September 1985.

              Ruling

           † When the motor car is transported by road under its own power, no
railway fare for chauffeur or cleaner is admissible.  The allowance of  14

paise per kilometre for the motor car transferred under its own power

includes the travelling expenses of the cleaner or chauffeur travelling in

the car.

II. FOR JOURNEYS BY ROAD

               (i)   He may draw mileage allowance at twice the rate applicable to him

under Rule 31 and  Rule 44 or any rate applicable to him, which has

been fixed under Rule 32, as the case may be.

                (ii)    He may draw additional mileage allowance at the rate applicable to him

under Rule 31 or Rule 44 or any rates applicable to him, which has been

*[G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated  29/03/1989]
†[G O(P) No. 35/1964/Fin., Dated  20/01/1964]

253

CHAP II ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULE 67

fixed under Rule 32, as the case may be, if two members of his family

accompany  him,  and  at  twice  that  rate  if  more  than  two  members

accompany him.

†Note.-  Officers of the First Grade on transfer from one station to another
shall be entitled to the higher rate of mileage for all journeys irrespective

of the distance travelled per day or the nature of the conveyance used,

except in the case of journeys on temporary transfers and relieving

duties of not more than two months’ duration.

               Government Decision

             # Children below five years can be counted as members of a family for the
purpose of claiming road mileage under the rule referred to above.

            (iii)   For the transportation of personal effects within the limits prescribed in

sub-clause I (iii) of this clause he may draw the actual cost of transport

limited to the mileage allowance at thrice the rate applicable to him.*

                    (b)  The following explanations are given for the terms employed in clause (a)

of this rule:-

  (i)  The term ‘personal effect’ is not subject to definition, but the

controlling  officer  must  satisfy  himself  that  a  claim  to

reimbursement on account of transportation is reasonable.

 (ii)   The term ‘motor cycle’ includes a side car.

  (iii)    A member of an officer’s family who follows him within six months

from the date of his transfer or precedes him by not more than

one  month  may  be  treated  as  accompanying  him.    If  such

member travels to the new station from a place other than the

†[G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated 29/03/1989]
# [G O(Ms)No.  817/1964/Fin., Dated  21/12/1964]

*[G O(P) No. 311/1966/Fin., Dated 13/07/1966]

254

CHAP II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULE 67

officer’s old station the officer may draw the actual fare for the
journey made by such member by rail or steamer plus the road
mileage,  if  any,  at  the  rate  and  subject  to  the  conditions
prescribed in clause (a) II (ii), for the actual distance of the
road journey performed by such member, provided that their
sum shall not exceed the total mileage  allowance that would
have been admissible had such member proceeded  from the
old to the new station.  For the purposes of this rule, the grade
of an officer should be determined with reference to the facts
on the date of his transfer while the number of fares admissible
should be determined with reference to the facts on the date
of the journey in respect of which the allowance is claimed.

               Ruling No. 1

            *In case an officer’s family performs the journey to the new station from a
place other than the old station by a lower class of accommodation than the
class of entitlement (in the case of journeys by rail or steamer), the mileage
that would have been admissible had the member proceeded from the old
station to the new station would be reckoned on the basis of the class by
which the journey was actually undertaken.

               Ruling No. 2

             If the members of his family have joined the Government servant at the
new station, within six months after the date of his transfer, they will be
eligible for Travelling Allowance for their journey from the old station to
the  new  station  though  they  may  later  on  decide  to  proceed  to  some
other station.

                (c)    An officer who claims higher Travelling Allowance on the ground that

members of his family accompanied him on transfer must support  his

* [G O(P) No. 290/1966/Fin., Dated 01/07/1966]

255

CHAP II ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULE 67

claim by a certificate showing the number and relationship of the said
members.

            *(d)   An officer claiming the cost of transporting personal effects must
support his claim by a certificate that the actual expense incurred
was not less than the sum claimed and that only goods belonging
to him and his family were carried. All vouchers claiming transporting
charges of personal effects by road should invariably mention the
number of the lorry or other conveyance by which, and the number
of the house from and to which the personal effects were transported.
The  officer  should  also  state  in  the  certificate  the  weight  of  the
personal effects actually  carried and the amount actually paid for
their transport separately by rail, road, steamer or other craft and
the  controlling  officer  should  record  a  certificate  that  he  has
scrutinised  the  details  and  satisfied  himself  that  the  claim  is
reasonable.    The  payees’  receipt  for  the  charges  paid  for  the
transport of personal effects should be attached to the bills.

              †(e)   An officer claiming the cost of transporting a conveyance by rail or
steamer must support his claim by railway or steamer receipt.  He
should also produce a certificate that the conveyance belonged to
him.  The receipt shall be attached to the bill.

              (f)   ‘Family’ for the purpose of these rules includes the officer’s wife,
children  and step-children residing with and wholly dependent on
him.  Not more than one wife is included in a family for the purpose
of these rules.  In the case of a female officer the ‘family’ will include
the  ‘husband’  also  provided  he  is  residing  with  and  wholly
dependent on her (the female officer).

  Note 1.-  Charges for the transport of personal effects of an officer on transfer
may be admitted in audit, if they do not for good and sufficient reasons

*, † [G O(P) No. 279/1967/Fin., Dated  15/07/1967]

256

CHAP II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULE 67

accompany him but are carried within a reasonable time before or after
the date of his journey on transfer.

  Note 2.- The expression ‘date of his transfer’ occurring in the first sentence
of Rule 67 (b) (iii)  means the date on which the officer takes over
charge at the new station in case his family follows him or the date on
which he hands over charge at the old station in case his family precedes
him.

 Note 3.- Claims preferred under this rule for the carriage of personal effects
should be admitted in all cases at the lowest available rates for “smalls,”

             “Smalls” are defined as goods which of themselves do not constitute
a  working  load  for  the  unit  of  railway  transport,  the  wagon.    The
minimum load constituting a wagon load is specified, by each of the
railways who quotes reduced rates for wagon loads, in its tariffs.

  Note 4.-  In cases where an officer is transferred from Station A to Station B
and again transferred within a reasonably short time to Station C he
may be allowed to recover the cost of carriage of personal effects from
Station A to Station C subject to the conditions—

  (1)    that  the total weight carried from Station B to Station C and from
Station A  to  Station  C  does  not  exceed  the  maximum  limit
prescribed in the rule, and

 (2)   that the total cost of transporting the effects from Station A to
Station  B,  from  Station  B  to  Station  C  and  from  Station A  to
Station C  does not exceed the amount admissible from Station A
to Station B plus that admissible from Station B to Station C.

    Note  5.-    When  an  officer  transports  more  than  the  maximum  quantity
admissible by a cheaper route, he can draw actual charges not exceeding
the  amount  admissible  for  the  maximum  quantity  by  the  normal
recognised route.

257

CHAP II ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULES 67-70

  Note 6.- A motor car may be treated as a part of personal effects in cases

where an officer is not entitled to its free transport in addition to personal

effects.

68.       *An officer transferred from one post to another who under the orders of
competent authority is permitted to hand over charge of his old post or to

take over charge of the new post at a place other than the headquarters is

entitled to -

                  (i)   Travelling Allowance as on tour from his old headquarters to the place
of handing over charge and from the place of taking over charge to the

new headquarters.

              (ii)   all concessions admissible under sub-rule (a) of rule 67 for journey

from the old to the new headquarters minus what will be admissible

to  the  Officer,  for  journey  as  on  tour  from  the  old  to  the  new

headquarters.

69.        An officer whose headquarters are changed while he is on tour, and who

proceeds to his headquarters without returning to his old, is entitled to—

                    (i)    Travelling  Allowance  as  on  tour  for  his  journey  upto  the  new

headquarters;

                   (ii)   *all concessions admissible under sub-rule (a) of rule 67 from the old to

the new headquarters minus what will be admissible to the Officer for a

journey as on tour from the old to the new headquarters.

70.          If the family of an officer, in consequence of his transfer, travels to a station

other than the new headquarters; Travelling Allowance for the journey of the
family may be drawn subject to the conditions that it does not exceed the

Travelling Allowance  that  would  have  been  admissible  if  the  family  had

proceeded to the new headquarters station.

*[G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated 29/03/1989]

258

CHAP II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULES 71-73

71.          An officer appointed to a new post while in transit from one post to another

is entitled to draw Travelling Allowance under this section for so much of

the journey on transfer as he had accomplished when he receives the fresh

orders and for the journey from the place at which he receives such orders to

his new station.

72.          An officer, who goes on leave not exceeding four months after he has given

over charge of his old post and before he has taken charge of his new post,

is  entitled,  whether  the  order  of  transfer  is  received  before  or  after  the

commencement of his leave, to Travelling Allowance under this section as

for a journey from his old to his new post.

72A.     *When a Government servant whose case is not covered by Rule 72 is

posted to a station other than that at which he was stationed before he

went  on  leave,  the  controlling  officer  may  permit  him  to  recover  the

Travelling Allowance  under  sub-rules  I  (iii)  and (iv)  or  II  (iii),  as  the

case  may  be,  of  Rule  67  (a)  as  for  a  journey  from  his  old  to  the  new

station.

73.           When an officer of the Government is transferred to the administrative control

of  another  Government  which  has  made  rules  prescribing  amounts  and

conditions of Travelling Allowances, his Travelling Allowances for the journey

to join his post under that Government and for the return journey  will be

governed by the rules of that Government regulating Travelling Allowances

on transfer.

  Note.- The controlling officer for the purpose of Travelling Allowance for the

journey of an officer to join his post under a borrowing  Government as

well as for the return journey will be the controlling officer in regard to

his post under that Government.

*[G O(P) No. 295/1984/Fin., Dated 12/06/1984]

259

CHAP II ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULES 74-77

SECTION  IV

JOURNEY  TO  JOIN  NEW  APPOINTMENT

74.       Except as otherwise provided in these rules Travelling Allowance is not

admissible to any person for the  journey to join his first appointment in

Government service.

75.        When a pensioner, or an officer who has been thrown out of employment

owing  to  a  reduction  of  establishment  or  the  abolition  of  his  post,  is

reappointed to Government service, the Government may permit him to draw
Travelling Allowance.    Travelling Allowance  under  this  rule  should  be

calculated as for a journey on tour, but no allowance may be drawn for halts

on the journeys.

76.          When mileage allowance is drawn under Rule 75 the rate admissible is that of

the grade to which the officer will belong after joining his post.

SECTION V

JOURNEY  TO  ATTEND  AN  EXAMINATION

77.            An officer is entitled to draw Travelling Allowance for the journey to and from

the place at which he appears for an obligatory departmental examination,

provided that Travelling Allowance shall not be drawn under this rule more

than twice for any particular examination.

            *Note 1.- If a Government servant actually performs the journey to the

place of examination, but is not able to appear for the examination

because of its cancellation at the last moment Travelling Allowance

may  be  sanctioned  to  him  by  the  Government/the  Head  of
Department  concerned  after  due  verification  of  the  facts.  This

concession  will  be  admissible  only  if  the  intimation  regarding  the

cancellation  did  not  reach  the  Government  servant  before  the

* [G O(P) No. 21/1967/Fin., Dated 18/01/1967]

260

CHAP II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULES 77-82

commencement  of the journey and the journey did not commence too

early,  i.e.  the  date  of  its  commencement  was  not  in  advance  of  the

schedule date of the examination by more than the minimum number of

days required for performing the journey.

  * Note 2.- If the place where the Government servant works is a centre for

the departmental examinations, he shall not be eligible for Travelling

Allowance  for  appearing  for  the  examinations  at  another  centre

under  this  rule,  except  in  case  where  he  has  to  appear  for  the

examination at that centre owing to reasons beyond his control.

78.        The Government may permit an officer to draw Travelling Allowance for the

journey to and from the place at which he appears for an examination other

than those specified in Rule 77.

79.      Travelling Allowance  under  this  section  should  be  calculated  as  for  a
journey on tour but no allowance may be drawn for halts on the journeys.

SECTION VI

JOURNEY  WHEN  PROCEEDING  ON  OR  RETURNING

FROM  LEAVE

80.          Except as otherwise provided in these rules, an officer is not entitled to any

Travelling Allowance for a journey made during leave or while proceeding

on or returning from leave.

81.         The Government may, for special reasons which should be recorded, permit

any officer to draw, for a journey of the kind specified in  Rule 80 Travelling

Allowance as for a journey on tour.

82.  (a)   When an officer is compulsorily recalled to duty before the expiry of his leave

and the leave is thereby curtailed by not less than one month, he is entitled to

* [G O(P) No. 80/1976/Fin., Dated 10/03/1976]

261

CHAP II ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULES 82-84

draw mileage allowance for the journey from the place at which the order of
recall reaches him.  If the period by which the leave is curtailed is less than a
month, mileage allowance may be allowed at the discretion of the authority
recalling the officer.

       (b)   If the officer recalled to duty is entitled to Travelling Allowance under Rule
72 he may not draw mileage allowance under clause (a) unless he abandons
his claims to the mileage allowance specified in Rule 66, Rule 67 (a) I (i) and
Rule 67 (a)  II (i).

83.          If a nongazetted officer, on compulsory recall from leave exceeding four
months,  is  posted  to  a  station  other  than  that  from  which  he  went  on
leave, he may, if his new station is distant more than 80 kilometres from
his old station, draw in addition to the allowance admissible under sub-
rules I (ii) and (iv) and II (iii) of Rule 67 (a) Travelling Allowance for his
family under Rule 67 for the journey from the place at which the order of
recall reaches him to the new station; provided that the amount so drawn
shall not exceed the amount admissible under Rule 67 for the journey
from the old to new station.

SECTION VII
JOURNEY  FOR  JOINING  FIRST  APPOINTMENT

84.            In the following cases Travelling Allowances are admissible for joining a first

appointment:-

                (1)    To any person appointed to the Public Works the Medical or any other
department in any capacity requiring technical skill or knowledge for
which he has been specially trained.

         (2)  To recruit constables enlisted for service at the other district headquarters,

for joining their first appointment at Trivandrum.

  Note.- Teachers deputed for training from Departmental Schools are entitled
to Travelling Allowance under the ordinary rules, for their journey to
and from the Training School or College.

262

CHAP II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULE 85

SECTION VIII

JOURNEYS  DURING  SUSPENSION   OR  TO  GIVE  EVIDENC E OR  TO
ATTEND  A  COURT  OF  LAW  AS  ASSESSOR  OR  JUROR  OR  IN
CONNECTION  WITH  THE  DEFENCE  OF  A  CASE
INSTITUTED  AGAINST  AN  OFFICER  FOR  ACTS
DONE  IN  HIS  OFFICIAL  CAPACITY

85.  (a)   *(i)   An officer under suspension who is required to perform any journey for

attending any departmental enquiry (other than police enquiry) or called

upon to appear before the Disciplinary Proceedings Tribunal may be
allowed, for the onward and return journeys, Travelling Allowance as

for a journey on tour from his head quarters to the place at which the

departmental enquiry or disciplinary proceedings, as the case may be,

is or are held or from the place at which he has been permitted to reside

during suspension to the place at which the departmental enquiry or

disciplinary proceedings, as the case may be, is or are held, whichever

is less.  No Travelling Allowance will, however, be admissible if the

enquiry or disciplinary proceeding as the case may be, is or are held at

an outstation at his own request.

                  !(ii)    An  officer  under  suspension,  if  reinstated  in  service,  pending

finalisation  of  the  enquiry  or  disciplinary  proceedings  initiated

against him, and posted to a station other than the one where he

was working at the time of his suspension may be allowed Travelling

Allowance  for  his  journey  to  the  new  station  as  for  journey  on

transfer from the old station or from the place where he has been

permitted to reside during  suspension whichever is less.  The grade of
the  officer  and  his  Travelling Allowance  for  the  journey  shall  be

determined on the basis of his pay in the post he was holding at the time

*[G O(P) No. 385/1967/Fin., Dated 26/08/1967]

![G O(P) No. 601/1978/Fin., Dated 03/08/1978]

263

CHAP II ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULE 85

of  his  suspension  or  the  pay  in  the  post  to  which  he  is  reinstated

whichever is lower.

                 (iii)   If an accused officer, whether under suspension or not, against whom

disciplinary proceedings have been initiated retires from service in the

course of the proceedings or if an officer against whom disciplinary

proceedings  are  initiated  after  his  retirement  and  is  called  upon  to

appear  before  Disciplinary  Proceedings  Tribunal/Disciplinary

Authority/Enquiry Authority  properly  constituted  under  competent

authority for holding the enquiry will be allowed for the onward and

return journey Travelling Allowance as for a journey on tour from his

place of residence to the place where the enquiry is held.

  *Note.- His Travelling Allowance will be regulated by the grade to which he

belonged prior to his suspension/retirement.

   †(b)   An accused officer, if not under suspension, when called upon to appear
before a Disciplinary Proceedings Tribunal/Disciplinary Authority/Enquiry

Authority, properly constituted under competent authority for holding the

enquiry,  may  be  allowed,  for  the  onward  and  return  journeys, Travelling

Allowance as for a journey on tour from his headquarters.

              In case the accused officer is on leave and is permitted to reside  at a place

other than his headquarters during the leave, he may be allowed Travelling

Allowance as for a journey on tour from his headquarters or from the place of

his residence whichever is less.  No Travelling Allowance will, however, be

admissible if the enquiry is held at the outstation at his own request.

  Note.- In the cases covered by Rule 85, no allowance for halts on journeys or

at the outstation where the enquiry is held will be allowed.

*[G O(P) No. 159/1973/Fin., Dated  23/05/1973]

†[G O(P) No. 436/1965/Fin., Dated 19/11/1965]

264

CHAP II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULE 86

86.          The following provisions apply to an officer who is summoned to give evidence :-

                (a)   In a criminal case, a case before a court-martial, a civil case to which

Government is a party or a departmental inquiry held by a properly

constituted authority within the State :

   (i)    He may draw Travelling Allowance as for a journey on tour attaching

to his bill a certificate of attendance given by the Court or other

authority which summoned him.

 (ii)  When he draws such Travelling Allowance, he may not accept
any payment of his expenses from the court or authority.  Any

fees  which  may  be  deposited  in  the  court  for  travelling  and

subsistence  allowance  of  the  witness  must  be  credited  to

Government.

(iii)   If the court in which he gives evidence is situated within eight

kilometres of his headquarters and no Travelling Allowance is

therefore admissible for the journey he may, if he is not in

receipt  of  Permanent  Travelling  Allowance,  accept  such

payment of actual travelling expenses as the court may make.

                  (b)   Officials employed by the Central Government or by  the Government

of any of the States appearing in cases in which the State is a party, as

witnesses on summons before the Criminal Court of this State to give

evidence regarding facts of which they have official knowledge, will,

on production of certificates of attendance issued by the courts before

which they appear as witnesses, be paid Travelling Allowance by the

Government  by whom they are employed at their own rates.  In cases

where the State is not a party, such officials will be paid Travelling

Allowance by the summoning court according to its own rules and the

charges will be borne by the State within whose limits the summoning

court is situated.

265

CHAP II ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULE 86

                         When any of the Governments requisitions the services of an official

of  a  commercial  department  as  a  witness  or  any  other  official  as  a

technical or expert witness within the meaning of section 45 of the

Indian Evidence Act, 1872, the pay of the official concerned for the

period of his absence from his headquarters and Travelling Allowance

and  other  expenses  due  to  him  will  be  borne  by  the  requisitioning

Government.  The Travelling Allowance in such cases will be regulated

by the Travelling Allowance Rules applicable to the official summoned.

The charges will, in the first instance, be borne by the Government

under  whom  he  is  employed  and  will  be  passed  on  after  audit  for

payment to the requisitioning Government.

               (c)   A person formerly in the service of the Government summoned to give

evidence under the circumstances mentioned in clause (a) above shall

be entitled to receive Travelling Allowance (as for journeys on tour) at

the  rate  admissible  to  the  person,  when  last  in  the  service  of  the

Government or if he is at the time employed under a fund administered

by the Government at the rates admissible for the appointment under

the fund.  He will be paid batta and Travelling Allowance by the court

which summoned him as witness from the allotment under ‘Witness

batta’ according to the rule of the court, but if he is entitled under this

clause to more than what is allowed by the court, the difference will be

paid by the department in which the officer was last serving.  Bills for

such claim should be supported by certificate similar to that referred to

in clause (a) (i)  above and showing the amount of the allowances paid

by the court.

   Note 1.- An officer summoned to give evidence while on leave is entitled to

Travelling Allowance under this rule from and to the place from which

he is summoned as if he were on duty.

266

CHAP II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULE 86-86A

  Note 2.- The T.A. claims of officers summoned by Civil Courts in any other

State will be settled in accordance with the reciprocal arrangements

entered into between this State and such other State.

  Note 3.- T.A. claims of officers summoned as witnesses in departmental

enquiries in other States are regulated by the reciprocal arrangements

made  with  the  respective  State  Governments.  Government  have

accordingly entered into the following reciprocal arrangements with

the Governments of Mysore and Tamil Nadu in this regard.

           In departmental enquiries  to which the State is a party, a Government

servant  giving  evidence    regarding  facts  of  which  he  has  official

knowledge  will  on  production  of  a  certificate  of  attendance  by  the

summoning authority,   be paid T.A. by the Government under whom he

is serving.

In departmental enquiries to which the State is not a party, a Government

servant giving evidence  regarding facts of which he has official knowledge

will be paid T.A. by  the summoning authority according to the rules under

which the Government servants draws  his Travelling Allowance or a journey

on  tour  on  production  of  a  certificate  signed  by  the  Controlling  Officer

showing the rates of T.A. and D.A. admissible to him for a journey on tour.

If the Government servant is his own controlling officer, the certificate will

be signed by him as such. The expenditure on account of T.A. and D.A. paid

by the summoning authority will be borne by the Government within the

territory of which that authority is situated.

86A.      If an officer undertakes a journey in connection with a civil or criminal case
instituted against him or acts done in his official capacity and the defence of

such case has been sanctioned by the competent authority such an officer

may be granted Travelling Allowance admissible to an officer of his grade

while on tour.

267

CHAP II ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULES 87-89A

87.        An officer summoned to give evidence in circumstances other than those
described in Rule 86 or to serve as an assessor or  juror in a court of law is not
entitled, by reason of his position as an officer, to any payments other than
those admissible by the rules of the court.  If the court pays him any sum as
subsistence allowance or compensation, apart from payment for travelling
expenses, he must credit that sum to Government before drawing full pay for
the day or days of absence.

87A.     *If an Officer undertakes a journey on a summons from an investigating
Police Officer, in a criminal case, such Officer may be granted Travelling
Allowance admissible to him while on tour if he is not an accused in the
criminal case.

                This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 2nd

April 1981.

      SECTION IX

JOURNEYS  TO  OBTAIN  MEDICAL  TREATMENT,  ADVICE
OR  CERTIFICATE  OR  TO  APPEAR BEFORE
A  MEDICAL  BOARD

88.         Travelling Allowance is not admissible for a journey undertaken to procure

health certificate on first appointment to Government service.

89.       If, in order to obtain anti-rabic treatment, an officer is compelled to leave a
station at which he falls ill and at which anti-rabic treatment is not available,
and travels to the nearest station where the treatment is available he may on
production  of  a  certificate  from  his  authorised  medical  attendant  that  the
journey was in his opinion absolutely necessary, draw Travelling Allowance
for the journey.  This concession is admissible also to an officer on leave.

89A.     †A Government servant suffering or suspected of suffering from  tuberculosis
may on production of a certificate from a T. B. Specialist that the journey was in

*[G O(P) No. 216/1981/Fin., Dated  02/04/1981]
†[G O(P) No. 775/1964/Fin., Dated 19/11/1964]

268

CHAP II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULES 89A-93

his  opinion  absolutely  necessary,  draw Travelling Allowance  in  accordance

with the rules for his journey to the nearest Government Medical Institution and

back in connection with his medical examination and periodical check-up.  This

concession is admissible also to an officer on leave.

90.           If an officer, being stationed where there is no medical officer, of Government, is

required to obtain a medical certificate from a medical officer of Government in

support of an application for an original grant of leave he may draw Travelling

Allowance for the journey undertaken to obtain that certificate.

  Note.-  Travelling Allowance is not admissible for a journey to obtain a medical

certificate in support of an application for an extension of leave.

91.        If an officer, having obtained a medical certificate in support of an

application for an original grant of leave, is required to appear before

a medical board, or to appear before a nominated medical officer of
Government  for  further  opinion  as  to  the  necessity  for  the  leave

recommended in that certificate, he may draw Travelling Allowance

for the journey undertaken to obtain that opinion.

  Note.-  Travelling Allowance is not admissible for a journey to obtain a

second medical opinion in support of an application for an extension

of  leave,  but  Travelling Allowance  is  admissible  for  a  second  or

subsequent  journey,  if  necessitated,  to  obtain  the  certificate  for  the

original grant of leave.

92.           The journeys contemplated by Rule 90 and Rule 91 should not be undertaken

without the previous permission of the controlling officer, if such permission

can be obtained without risk to the officer requiring medical service.

93.    (a)   An officer who is directed by his official superior in the interests of the public

service, to apply for an invalid pension, may, if he is required to make a

journey in order to appear before a medical  board, draw his actual travelling

expenses,  subject  to  a  maximum  of  the  amount  of  Travelling Allowance

269

CHAP II ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULES 93-96

calculated for the journey.  If it is necessary for him to return to his headquarters
after appearing before the medical board he may draw his actual expenses
subject to the same maximum.  In both cases his Travelling Allowance bill
must be supported by a certificate that he was directed to apply for an invalid
pension in the interests of public service and that he did not voluntarily ask
to retire.

       (b)   A competent authority may allow actual expenses, as limited by clause (a) of
this rule, to be drawn by an officer who voluntarily applies for an invalid
pension, provided that the authority is satisfied that the circumstances of the
applicant are such as to justify the concession.

94.        Except as provided for in Rule 91 and Rule 93 no Travelling Allowance is
admissible  for  a  journey  undertaken  in  order  to  appear  before  a  medical
board.

95. (a) Travelling Allowance under Rules 89 to 94 should be calculated as for a
journey on tour, but no allowance may be drawn for halts on the journeys.

        (b)     (i)    All India Service Officers who perform journeys to seek medical advice/
treatment  under  the All  India  Services  (Medical Attendance)  Rules,
1954 will be given Travelling Allowance for the journeys, as on tour.

                     (ii)    No daily allowance will be allowed for the halts made in this connection.

            (iii)   The family members of these officers will be allowed single first class
railway  fare  (i.e.  the  class  of  accommodation  to  which  the  officers
themselves are entitled) or single fare of any lower class by which the
patient actually travels for consulting a Government Specialist on the
advice of the authorised Medical Attendant.

     SECTION X
JOURNEYS IN ATTENDANCE ON AN INCAPACITATED OFFICER
OR MEMBER OF HIS FAMILY

96.           A medical officer of Government who considers that an officer on whom it is
his duty to attend professionally should leave his station to obtain medical

270

CHAP II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULES 96-98

advice or treatment or to proceed on leave, and that it is unsafe for him to
travel unattended, may if he does not himself accompany him, arrange for an
attendant, to do so; and the attendant (a) if an officer, shall be deemed to
have been travelling on duty and may draw Travelling Allowance for the
onward and return journey as for a journey on tour, and (b) if not an officer,
may draw actual expenses.

              When the medical officer’s opinion as to the necessity for the journey and
for an attendant during it, cannot be obtained before its commencement, a
certificate  from  him  that  the  journey  with  an  attendant  was  necessary  is
sufficient for the purpose of this rule.

SECTION XI

JOURNEYS  ON  A  COURSE  OF  TRAINING

97.          When an officer or a student not already in government service is selected to
undergo a course of training, Government may decide the scale, if any on
which he shall draw-

                (a)    Travelling Allowance for the original journey to and the last journey from

the place of training, and for halts at such place;

           (b)   in the case of training at a school, college or similar institution,
Travelling Allowance for similar journeys on the occasion of holidays
and  vacations;  and

                (c)   Travelling Allowance for journeys during the course of training:

                 Provided that the scale so fixed shall not exceed that admissible to officers

of similar status on duty at the place of training.

98.   (a)   An officer deputed to undergo a course of training, if the course of training
exceeds three months,  may draw Travelling Allowance under the rules for
journeys on transfer irrespective of whether the training is at a fixed centre
or not.  If the course of training does not exceed three months, the rules
which govern journeys on tour shall apply.

271

CHAP II ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULES 98-99

 *Note.- Omitted.

 (This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force on 2nd March 1990)

      (b)   If in a training school, a vacation is allowed, no Travelling Allowance is
admissible for journeys from and to the school unless for the purpose of
a practical course of training which is required to be undergone at another

station during such vacation.

SECTION XII

JOURNEY  OF  THE  FAMILY  OF  AN  OFFICER
WHO  DIES  IN  SERVICE

99. (1)   If an officer dies while in service,  members of his family will be granted
Travelling Allowance for the journey to his home or to any other place where
they may wish to reside whether it is inside or outside the State either from his
headquarters or from the place of his death, provided that the amount shall
not  exceed  what  would  be  admissible  for  a  journey  from  the  officer’s
headquarters to his home.

  Note.- For the purposes of this rule the headquarters of an officer on leave
shall be considered to be the place of his headquarters where he was
last on duty.

       (2)   The rates of Travelling Allowance shall be those which would be admissible

under the rules for a journey on transfer less that admissible to the officer.

       (3)   The family should perform the journey within three months of the death
of the Government employee and the Travelling Allowance should be
claimed as soon as possible after the journeys is over.  The Travelling
Allowance may be drawn in advance if the officer drawing the bill is
satisfied that the journey will be made.

        (4)    Bills will be drawn and countersigned by the officers authorised to deal with
the bills of the deceased Government employee,  if the deceased officer is a

*[G O(P) No.391/2002/Fin., Dated 19/06/2002]

272

CHAP II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULES 99-99A

nongazetted officer and if the officer is a gazetted officer, the bill will be
countersigned by his superior officer.

       (5)   # [Deleted]

               Ruling

          The term “Travelling Allowance” mentioned in this rule includes cost of

transportation of personal effects also.

 SECTION XIII

JOURNEY  OF  AN  OFFICER  AFTER  RETIREMENT

99A.        Travelling Allowance will be allowed to an officer on retirement to enable him
to proceed to any place within or outside* the State where he proposes to
settle down after retirement subject to the following conditions :-

                    (i)    The  concession  will  be  given  only  in  cases  of  retirement    on
superannuation, or on invalid, retiring or compensation pension, or
with effect from 30th July 1975, in cases of compulsory retirement
under Rule 60 A, Part I of these rules, but will not be given in other
cases of compulsory retirement or cases of removal or dismissal
from service.

          †,*(ii)   The Travelling Allowance will be given as for a journey on transfer
from  the  last  headquarters  to  the  place    of  residence,  where  he
proposes  to  settle  down.    For    regulating  the  claim  accordingly,
every Government servant should furnish to his controlling officer
before his retirement, a declaration indicating the station where he
intends to reside after retirement.  The officers compulsorily retired
under Rule 60-A, of Part 1 of these rules shall furnish the declaration
within one month after such retirement.

# [G O(P) No. 277/1975/Fin., Dated  30/06/1975]
*[G O(P) No. 44/1978/Fin., Dated  10/01/1978]
†[G O(P) No. 74/1977/Fin., Dated 28/02/1977]

273

CHAP II ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULES 99A-99B

          **(iii)   The journey shall be performed within one year of the date of retirement:

                          *Provided that officers who are re-employed under the Government

of  Kerala  and  whose  re-employment  is  ordered  while  on  leave

preparatory to retirement or within one year of the date of retirement,

can avail themselves of the benefit of this rule, if the journey is

performed within one year from the date of expiry of the period of

re-employment.

              †(iv)   If Travelling Allowance advance is allowed it should be restricted to 75
per cent of the Travelling Allowance admissible for the journey and a

declaration should be obtained from the Government servant giving his

consent for recovery from his pension, if need be.  The detailed T.A. bill

should be presented **within two months of the date of drawal of the

advance  to  the  last  controlling  officer  for  adjustment  and  counter

signature.  If the Government servant is a Gazetted Officer the bill should
be sent to the office of the Accountant General for pre-audit before

payment.

                      This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect

from 8th January 1970.

99B.      # [Deleted]

** [G O(P) No. 595/1978/Fin., Dated  29/07/1978]

*[G O(P) No. 537/1980/Fin., Dated  03/09/1980]
†[G O(P) No. 200/1970/Fin., Dated  06/04/1970]
# [G O(P) No. 277/1975/Fin., Dated  30/06/1975]

274

CHAP III ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULES 100-103

CHAPTER  III

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCE  ADMISSIBLE  WHEN  MEANS  OF
TRANSPORT  ARE  SUPPLIED  WITHOUT  COST  TO
THE  OFFICER  TRAVELLING

SECTION I

JOURNEYS  BY  RAILWAY

100.         When  an officer is entitled to or is allowed free transit by railway, whether on
a free pass or otherwise the mileage allowance which he draws for the journey
must be reduced by the amount of the fare which, but for such free transit, he
would have paid. This rule applies to cases in which  a free pass is issued on
any railway.  The reduction made must include the full number of fares  covered
by the pass, unless the officer certifies that he did not use the pass in respect
of any fare or fares for which no reduction is made.

101.         When an officer in receipt of permanent Travelling Allowance uses a free pass
on a railway within his sphere of duty, he must deduct from his Permanent
Travelling Allowance for the month the amount of the railway fares which he
would have paid if he had not travelled on a pass.

102.     When an officer is permitted to travel by railway in a higher class on
payment of a lower fare, his mileage allowance must be reduced by the
amount by which the fare of the class in which he travels exceeds the fare
actually paid.

SECTION II

JOURNEYS  BY  SEA  OR  RIVER  STEAMER

103.     When an officer travels by sea or river, otherwise than on payment of
passage money, in a steamer the cost of which is paid by Government or
by a local fund, he may draw no Travelling Allowance except subject to
the provision of Rule 110* the daily allowance of his grade; provided
that, when his servants and luggage are not conveyed on the vessel but

*[G O(P) No. 113/1976/Fin., Dated 06/04/1976]

275

CHAP III ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULES 103-105

are sent separately at his expense, he may draw in addition the actual

cost of transporting them.

104.         When an officer is allowed free transit by sea or river steamer, otherwise than

in a Government vessel, the mileage allowance which he draws for the journey

must be reduced by the amount of the fare which, but for such free transit, he

would  have  paid.    If  he  travels  on  a  free  pass,  the  reduction  made  must

include the full number of fares covered by the pass unless the officer certifies

that  he  did  not  use  the  pass  in  respect  of  any  fare  or  fares  for  which  no

reduction is made.

SECTION III

JOURNEYS  BY  AIR

105.       When an officer is allowed free transit by air in a Government machine or in

a machine chartered by Government for the purpose, he is entitled subject to

the provisions of Rule 110* to Travelling Allowance as follows:-

                (a)   If he has not to provide  separate conveyance at his own expense for

his servants or luggage, he may draw the daily allowance of his grade

and may not exchange it for mileage allowance. If, however, part of the

journey is made by other means of locomotion, he  may at his option

draw in lieu of daily allowance the mileage allowance admissible for

that part.

                        *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect

from 15th May 1970.

             (b)   If he has to provide separate conveyance at his own expense for his

servants or luggage he may-

  (i)     if the journey is between places connected by rail or steamer draw

incidental expenses or three-fifth of a fare as the case may be of

*[G O(P) No. 113/1976/Fin., Dated 06/04/1976]

276

CHAP III ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULES 105-107

the class of accommodation to which he is entitled by railway or
steamer, or

(ii)    if the journey is between places not connected by rail or steamer
draw the daily allowance of his grade or half the mileage allowance
calculated for the journey.

                If, however, a part of the journey is performed by other means of locomotion
he may draw mileage allowance admissible for that part subject to the condition
laid down in sub-clause (i) and (ii) of clause (b) of Rule 62.

106.      An officer, when making a journey by air in a Government machine or in a
machine chartered by Government for the purpose shall pay a first class full
or half railway fare, as the case may be, to Government on behalf of each
person not entitled to travel in that machine who may accompany him.

  Note.- If an officer wishes to take with him any non-entitled person in a
Government machine or in a machine chartered by Government, he
should obtain the sanction of the Government.  In giving such sanction,
care  should  be  taken  to  see  that  no  extra  expenditure  is  caused  to
Government thereby.

SECTION IV

OTHER  JOURNEYS

107.     Except where otherwise expressly provided in these rules, when on  a
journey other than a journey by railway or by sea or river steamer or by
air  an  officer  uses  a  means  of  locomotion  provided  at  the  expense  of
Government, a local fund or Government of another State and does not
pay  the  cost  of  its  use  or  propulsion,  he  is  entitled  subject  to  the
provisions of Rule 110 to Travelling Allowance as follows:-

               (a)   If he has not to provide separate conveyance at his own expense for his
servants or luggage, he may draw the daily allowance of the grade and
may not exchange it for mileage allowance.  If, however, part of the journey
is made by other means of locomotion, he may at his option draw in lieu of
daily allowance the mileage allowance admissible for that part.

277

CHAP III ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULES 107-110

             Ruling

                # When a Government servant performs a journey on transfer in a conveyance
provided by the Government, he may be allowed daily allowance for each calendar
day of journey.  He will not, however,   be  eligible  for  any  additional  daily
allowance   for  the members of his family who accompany him and for whom
he  does  not  pay  any  fare,  nor  will  he  be  paid  any  allowance  for  the
personal effects carried along with him for which he does not pay any
charge except in the case of transport by rail in which case he may be
allowed the actual charges as provided under Rule 67 (a) I (iii), Kerala
Service Rules, Part II.

                (b)   If he has to provide separate conveyance at his own expenses for his
servants or luggage, he may, if the conditions of Rule 62 are fulfilled,
exchange his daily allowance for half the mileage allowance calculated
for the journey and draw in addition the mileage allowance admissible
for any part of the journey made by other means of locomotion.

108.        When an officer is provided with means of locomotion as in Rule 107 but pays
all the cost of its use or propulsion, he may draw Travelling Allowance  under
the ordinary rules, subject to the deduction of such fixed hire or charge as
Government may fix.

109.      *[Deleted]

      SECTION V

 METHOD  OF  CALCULATING  DAILY  ALLOWANCE

110.      † When an officer, who is supplied with means of conveyance without
charges,  returns  to  his  headquarters  on  the  same  day,  daily  allowance
admissible under Rule 103, Rule 105 and Rule 107 will be limited to the
incidental expenses at the rates given below:

# [G O(P) No. 617/1963/Fin., Dated 12/12/1963]
*, † [G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated  29/03/1989]

278

CHAP III ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULE 110

 Officers of the First Grade

 Officers of the Second Grade

 Officers of the Third Grade

 Officers of the Fourth Grade

  ..

  ..

  ..

  ..

8 paise per kilometre

6 paise per kilometre

4 paise per kilometre

3 paise per kilometre

                Effective from 1st July 1980.

              When an officer is provided with free conveyance for part of the journey or

for  one  way  journey  only  (i.e.  either  for  going  from  or  for  return  to

Headquarters)  and he returns to his head quarters on the same day the daily
allowance if admissible under the rules will be  limited  to the incidental

expenses as indicated above  for the onward or downward journey as the

case may be.  He may in addition draw mileage allowance admissible for the

part of the journey for which the conveyance is not provided free of charges,

provided the distance travelled exceeds 32 kilometres.

   Note 1.- A chauffeur or driver or cleaner or mechanic of a motor car, jeep,

van, wagon, lorry, boat or other means of locomotion supplied at the

expense of Government will be allowed daily allowance at the rates

specified under these rules.

  *Note 2.- The rates of incidental expenses mentioned in this rule shall be

subject to a minimum of half daily allowance.

             Effective from 1st May 1981.

* [G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated  29/03/1989]

279

CHAP IV ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULE 111

CHAPTER  IV

GRANT  OF  TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCE  TO  THOSE  WHO
ARE  NOT  IN  REGULAR  GOVERNMENT  SERVICE

111.      The grant of Travelling Allowance and Daily Allowance to non-official

members  of  Committees,  Boards,  Councils,  etc.  will  be    regulated  as

follows:-

               (i)   Committees, Boards, Councils, etc. constituted by Government will be

classified into two-First Class and Second Class—according to their

importance, jurisdiction and the over all status of the members.  Whether

a committee (or other body) is of the First Class or the Second Class

will be specified in the orders constituting the committee.

                    (ii)    Non-officials (including retired officials) serving in First Class Committees,

Boards, etc., will be allowed Travelling Allowance and daily allowance at

the rates admissible to First Grade Officers .

                  (iii)    Non-officials  (including  retired  officials)  serving  in  Second  Class

Committees, Boards, etc., will be allowed Travelling Allowance and

daily allowance at the rates admissible to Second Grade Officers drawing
a pay of more than  † ````` 1500  per mensem.

                         † Effective from 1st September 1985.

           (iv)   The Travelling Allowance admissible to Members of the Legislative

Assembly serving in any committee (or other body) will, however, be

regulated by the provisions of the Payment of Salaries and Allowances

Act.

                 (v)   Members of Parliament serving in such committee (or other body) will

be  allowed  Travelling Allowance  and  daily  allowance  at  the  rates

† [G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated  29/03/1989]

280

CHAP IV ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULES 111-112

admissible to M.L.As. subject to the condition that in respect of railway

journeys they will be allowed only the incidental expenses, since they

are in possession of free railway pass.

                  (vi)   The Travelling Allowance Rules in the Kerala Service Rules applicable

to First and Second Grade Officers of Government will apply to the

non-official members of First and Second Class committees respectively.

*Member of a First class Committee will however be allowed mileage

for road journeys between places connected by railway, if any public

interest is served by such road journeys.

  Note.-  Non-official members, other than Members of the Legislative Assembly,

serving on First  and Second  Class Committees, may be paid per day of

attendance at the  meetings of the committees at places within a radius

of eight kilometres from their residence, sitting fees to cover out of

pocket expenses at the rate equal to the amount of Daily Allowance

admissible for halts at the station.

112.          The  following  principles  should  be  observed  in  granting  Travelling

Allowances to witnesses, who are not officers but are summoned to give

evidence in a case in which the conduct of an officer is the subject of a

departmental  enquiry  held  by  officers  serving  directly  under  the

Government:-

                (1)  Travelling Allowance will be paid only in respect of witnesses whose

evidence is considered to be of material value by the officer conducting

the enquiry.

                  (2)    Such allowances may be paid to witnesses summoned on behalf of the officer

whose conduct is the subject of a departmental enquiry in the event of the

officer concerned clearing himself.

*[G O(P) No. 186/1989/Fin., Dated  29/03/1989]

281

CHAP IV ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULES 112-112A

                  (3)    In exceptional cases the officer conducting the enquiry may, for reasons to be

recorded, recommend to the Government that the principles laid down above

be departed from owing to special reasons and it is for the Government to

accept or reject the recommendation.

112 A.    *The  rates  of  Travelling Allowance  and  batta  in  the  case  of  those  coming

under Rule 112 will be the rates allowable from time to time to non-official

witnesses  summoned  by  criminal  courts,  the  discretion  in  the  matter  of

classification  of  such  witnesses  for  the  purpose  being  vested  with  the

concerned  authority  conducting  the  enquiry.

* [G O(P) No. 1/1966/Fin., Dated 01/01/1966]

282

CHAP V ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  II

[ RULES 113-116

CHAPTER  V

CONTROLLING  OFFICERS

113.     The  Government  shall  declare  what  authority  shall  be  the  controlling

officer, for Travelling Allowance purposes, of each officer or grade of

officers.  It may, if it thinks fit, declare that any particular officer shall be

his controlling officer.

114.     Except where expressly permitted by a competent authority a controlling

officer may not delegate to a subordinate his duty of countersignature.

115.       Except as provided in Rule 113 no bill for Travelling Allowance, other than

Permanent  Travelling  Allowance  shall  be  paid  unless  it  is  signed  or

countersigned by the controlling officer concerned.

116.     It is the duty of a controlling officer, before signing or countersigning a

Travelling Allowance bill—

                (a)    to scrutinise the necessity, frequency and duration of journeys and halts

for which Travelling Allowance is claimed, and to disallow the whole or

any part of the Travelling Allowance claimed for any journey or halts, if he

considers that a journey was unnecessary  or unduly protracted or that a

halt was of excessive duration;

                   (b)    to scrutinise carefully the distances entered in Travelling Allowance bills;

                 (c)   to satisfy himself that mileage allowance for journeys by railway or

steamer, excluding additional fare or fares allowed for incidental

expenses,  has  been  claimed  at  the  rate  applicable  to  the  class  of

accommodation  actually  used  and  that  where  the  actual  cost  of

transporting servants, personal effects, etc., is claimed under these

rules  the  scale  on  which  such  servants,  effects,  etc.,  were

transported was reasonable; and to disallow any claim which, in his

opinion, does not fulfil that condition;

283

CHAP V ]

TRAVELLING  ALLOWANCES

[ RULE 116

                (d)    to check any tendency to abuse the option of exchanging daily allowance for

mileage allowance;

                (e)    to observe any subsidiary rules or orders which a competent authority

may make for his guidance; and

               (f)    to satisfy himself before permitting a claim under Rule 23 that the officer

actually bought  a through ticket at the rate claimed and that it was not

possible for him to get a through ticket at a cheaper rate by paying only for

the appropriate class of accommodation over that portion of the journey
where accommodation of that class was available.

284

APPENDICES

285

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

LIST  OF  APPENDICES

Appendix

,,

,,

,,

,,

,,

,,

,,

,,

,,

,,

,,

Model form of Agreement

List of Heads of Departments.

Rules relating to charge of office.

Rules regulating grant of Special
Pay 
and  Compensatory
Allowances.

Rules  regulating  the  grant  of
overtime allowance to the staff
of Departments during sessions
of the Legislative Assembly.

List of recognised Tuberculosis
and  Leprosy  Institutions  for
of
of 
purposes 
extraordinary  leave  to  officers
not in permanent employ.

grant 

[Deleted]

Rules relating to casual leave

Rules  for  the  grant  of  leave  to
officers  appointed  for  limited
periods.

List of Hilly Tracts.

(Please see) The Kerala Service
Rules, part III.

[Deleted]

I

II

III

IV

IV-A

V

VI

VII

VIII

IX

X

XI

286

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

,,

,,

,,

,,

XII

XII A

XII B

Rules  for  the  grant  of  leave  to
Radiation  workers  in  the  State
Medical Service.

Rules  for  the  grant  of  leave
without allowances or taking up
employment  abroad  or  within
India.

Rules for the grant of LWA for
those  ineligible  for  leave  for
study purpose under Rule 88 or
Rule 91 Part I, KSRs.

XII C

Rules for the grant of LWA for
joing  spouse

287

APPENDIX I ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

APPENDIX  I

MODEL  FORM  OF  AGREEMENT

(Referred to in Rule 8 of Part I)

          ARTICLES  OF AGREEMENT  made  this  the  ……………….  day  of

……………  two  thousand  and  …………………….  BETWEEN  Sri

…………………………. (here enter name and address) of the first part

and the Governor of Kerala (hereinafter called the Government) of

the other part.

              WHERE AS THE GOVERNMENT have engaged the party of the first part and

the party of the first part has agreed to serve the Government on the terms and

conditions hereinafter contained.

                 NOW THESE PRESENTS WITNESS as follows:-

                 1.  The party of the first part shall submit himself to the orders of the

Government and of the officers and authorities under whom he may

from time to time be placed by the Government and shall remain in

the  service  for  the  term  of  …….years  commencing  from  the

…………………..day of 20………….subject to the provisions herein

contained.

                   2.  The party of the first part shall devote his whole time to his duties

and at all times obey the rules including the Government Servants’

Conduct Rules prescribed from time to time being for the regulation

of the public service to which he may belong and shall whenever

required, proceed to any part of India and there perform such duties

as may be assigned to him.

                     3.  The service of the party of the first part may be terminated as follows:-

                         (1)     At the end of  the first year by either party without notice.

288

APPENDIX I ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

 (2)    At any time on *two calendar months’ notice in writing given to

him by the Government if, in the opinion of the Government, the

party  of  the  first  part  proves  unsuitable  for  the  efficient

performance of his duties during service under this agreement.

        *Provided that the Government may in lieu of any notice herein

provided for, give the party of the first part, a sum equivalent to

the amount of his pay of two months or shorter notice than two

months, if they pay him a sum equal to the amount of his pay for

the period by which such notice falls short of two months.

          *Effective from 24th April 1982.

(3)      By the Government without previous notice if the Government

are  satisfied  on  medical  evidence  that  the  party  of  the  first

part is unfit and is likely for a considerable period to continue

unfit by reason of ill-health for the discharge of his duties in

India.

         PROVIDED always that the decision of the Government that the

party of the first part is likely to be unfit shall be conclusively

binding on the party of the first part.

 (4)       By the Government or their officers having proper authority without

any previous notice if the party of the first part shall be guilty of any

insubordination, intemperance or other misconduct or of any breach

or non-performance of any of the provisions of these presents or of

any rules pertaining to the public service to which he may belong.

(5)     By *two calendar months’ notice in writing given at any time

during  service  under  this  agreement  (except  the  first  year

*[G O(P) No. 199/1982/Fin., Dated  24/04/1982]

289

APPENDIX I ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

thereof) either by him to the Government or by the Government

or their authorised officer to him without cause assigned.

         *Effective from 24th April 1982.

                 PROVIDED always that the Government may, in lieu of any notice herein

provided  for,    give  the  party  of  the  first  part  a  sum  equivalent  to  the

amount of his pay of *two months or shorter notice than *two months if

they  pay  him  a  sum  equal  to  the  amount  of  his  pay  for  the  period  by

which such notice falls short of *two months.

                 *Effective from 24th April 1982.

               (†)  Omitted.

               The second Proviso is in effect from 24th April 1982.

              The term ‘pay’ for the purpose of this clause shall mean the pay (including
special pay and personal pay, if any), the party of the first part is receiving

under these presents at the time, unless he is receiving officiating pay in

which case it shall mean the pay (including special pay and personal pay, if

any) of his substantive appointment.

                       4.    If the party of the first part is suspended from duty during investigation

into any charge of misconduct mentioned in sub-clause (4) of clause 3

hereof,  he  shall  not  be  entitled  to  any  pay  during  such  period  of

suspension but shall be entitled to receive a subsistence grant at such

rate as the Government may decide to allow him.

                5.   The scale of pay attached to the post of…………...…….. to which the

party of the first part is appointed shall comprise the following monthly

rates of pay in successive stages of every twelve months’ service :-

(Pay `````.)

*, † [G O(P) No. 199/1982/Fin., Dated  24/04/1982]

290

APPENDIX I ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

              Stages:

                        1 ……………

                        2. …………...

                        3. …………...

                        etc.

             He shall from the ……………. be granted pay at the rates of Rupees
………… per mensem in the aforesaid scale and shall receive pay in
the succeeding stages provided for in that scale in accordance with
the     provisions   of   the   rules   from    time to   time    in  force and
applicable  to  his  case,  service  in  the  stages  reckoning  from  the
aforesaid date.  The pay from time to time payable to him under these
presents  shall  be  paid  for  such  time  as  he  shall  serve  under  this
agreement  and  actually  perform  his  duties  commencing  from  the
aforesaid date and ceasing on the date of his quitting service or on
the day of his discharge therefrom or on the day of his death if he
shall die whilst in service.  If at any time the party of the first part
proceeds on deputation on foreign service his pay during deputation
shall  be  regulated  by  the  ordinary  rules  regarding  deputation  on
foreign service.

                      6.   The party of the first part shall be eligible, subject to the exigencies
of  public  service,    for  leave  and  leave  salary  under  the  rules
contained in Appendix VIII to Kerala Service Rules, as amended
from time to time.

                    7.    If the party of the first part is required to travel in the interest of public
service he shall be entitled to Travelling Allowance on the scale provided
for  in the rules framed by the Government from time to time in force and
applicable to the class of officers serving in the same station to which
Government may declare him to correspond in  status or conditions of
service.

291

APPENDIX I ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

                8.  The party of the first part shall be eligible for any concessions in
relation to medical attendance and treatment that may be prescribed
by  the  Government  for  the  class  of  officers  serving  in  the  same
station to which the Government may declare the party of the first
part to correspond in status or conditions of service.

               9.   Notwithstanding anything herein before contained the party of the
first  part  shall,  unless  otherwise  decided  by  the  Government,  be
entitled  to  receive  in  whole  or  in  part  as  may  be  authorised  by  the
Government  the benefits of any improvement that may be sanctioned
by  the  Government  subsequent  to  the  date  of  these  presents  in  the
terms and conditions of the service of members of the public service to
which  he  may  for  the  time  being  belong  and  the  decisions  of  the
Government in respect of such improvement in the terms and conditions
of service of the party of the first part shall operate so as to modify to
that extent the provisions of these present.

              10.  Notwithstanding anything herein before contained the pay and leave
salary admissible under these present shall be subject to any emergency
cut that may be ordered by the Government for the same period and on
the same terms as for other officers under the administrative control of
the Government.

                   11.   In respect of any matter in regard to which no provision has been made
in this agreement the provisions of the Kerala Service Rules shall apply
to the extent to which they are applicable to the service hereby provided
for and the decision of the Government as to their applicability shall be
final.

             In witness whereof Sri …………………… the party of the first part and Sri
………… ……………… Secretary to the Government for and on behalf of the
Governor of Kerala hereunto set their hands the day and year first above

written.

292

APPENDIX I ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

                 Signed by Sri…………………… the party of the first part.

                         In the presence of witnesses:—

                         1 ……………………….

                         2 ……………………….

                  Signed by Sri ………………….. Secretary to the Government for and on

behalf of the Governor of Kerala.

                         In the presence of witnesses :—

         1………………………….

                         2………………………….

293

APPENDIX II ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

APPENDIX  II

LIST  O F HEADS  OF  DEPARTMENTS

[Referred to in Rule 12 (13) of Part I]

1.       Secretaries, Additional Secretaries and Joint Secretaries to Government

(including Secretary to the Legislative Assembly).

2.         Board of Revenue

3.         Director of Public Instruction

4.         Additional Director of Public Instruction

5.         Director of Collegiate Education

6.         Director of Examination and Text Books

7.         Director of Technical Education

8.         Chief Engineers

9.         Chief Conservator of Forests

10.       Director of Agriculture

11.       The High Court

12.       Chairman, Public Service Commission

13.       Director of Public Relations

14.       Transport Commissioner

15.       Inspector General of Police

16.       Director of Health Services

17.       Advocate General

18.       Registrar of Co-operative Societies

19.       Inspector General of Registration

20.       [Deleted]

21.       Labour Commissioner

294

APPENDIX II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

22.       Examiner of Local Fund Accounts

23.       Inspector General of Prisons

24.       Director of Animal Husbandry

25.       [Deleted]

26.       Director of Harijan Welfare

27.       † Director of  Medical Education

28.       * Director of Municipal Administration

29.       Director of Industries and Commerce

30.       Director of Fisheries

31.       Director, Bureau of Economics and Statistics.

32.       Director of Indigenous Medicine

33.       # Director of Insurance

34.       Chairman, Kerala Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal, Trivandrum.

35.       Principals, Ayurveda Colleges.

36.       Industrial Tribunals

37.       The State Port Officer

38.       Commissioner, Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowment Fund.

39.       Director of Tourist Department

40.       Presiding Officer, Labour Courts

41.       Director of Museums and Zoos

42.       Secretary to Governor and Comptroller, Governor’s Household

43.       Director of Employment and Training

44.       Director of Geology

†[Substitution G O(P) No. 207/2012/ Fin., Dated  03/04/2012  (with effect from 10/05/1983)]
*[G O(P) No.196/2002/Fin. Dated 03/04/2002 with effect from 05/09/1980]
# [G O(P) No.705/1979/Fin., Dated 06/08/1979]

295

APPENDIX II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

45.        Controller of ! Legal Metrology

46.        Drugs Controller

47.        Chairman, Land Board

48.        Chief Town Planner and Consulting Architect

49.        Director of Panchayats

50.        Director of Archaeology

51.        [Deleted]

52.        Director of Fire Force

53.        Director of Soil Conservation

54.       † Director of Factories and Boilers

55.        State Editor, Kerala Gazetteers

56.        # Director, Rajya Sainik Board

57.        Vigilance Commissioner

58.        Director of Vigilance Investigation

59.        Director of Treasuries

60.        Director of State Lotteries

61.        Chief Electrical Inspector of Government

62.        Secretary of Official Language (Legislative) Commission

63.       * Director of Printing

             * Effective from 12th August 1992.

64.        Director of State Water Transport Department

![Substitution G O(P) No.544/2007/Fin., Dated 13/11/2007, come into force on 16/12/1993]

†[G O(P) No.172/1984/Fin., Dated  20/03/1984]

# [G O(P) No. 1101/1979/Fin., Dated 21/12/1979]

*[G O(P) No.197/2002/Fin., Dated 03/04/2002]

296

APPENDIX II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

65.         * Chief Chemical Examiner to Government

              This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 23rd

September 1983.

66.         ** Director of Civil Supplies

67.         Director of Coir Development

68.         ! Director of Handlooms

           This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from

22nd  September 1979.

69.         ~ Member-Secretary, State Planning Board

Effective from 24th April 1981.

70.         † Principal, Government Homeopathic Medical College, Calicut

Effective from 19th March 1982.

71.         @ Director of Homeopathy

Effective from 21st April 1973.

72.         ¤ Director of Publications, Department of Cultural Publications.

Effective from 26th August 1983.

73.         # Director of Archives

Effective from 18th February 1984.

*[G O(P) No. 876/1987/Fin., Dated 08/10/1987]

**[G O(P) No. 28/1975/Fin., Dated 17/01/1975]

! [G O(P) No. 142/1980/Fin., Dated 19/02/1980]

~ [G O(P) No. 250/1981/Fin., Dated  24/04/1981]
†[G O(P) No.124/1982/Fin., Dated 19/03/1982]
@ [G O(P) No. 170/1984/Fin., Dated 20/03/1984]

¤ [G O(P) No. 670/1984/Fin., Dated 17/11/1984]
# [G O(P) No. 743/1984/Fin., Dated 15/12/1984]

297

APPENDIX II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

74.         @ Director of Rehabilitation

Effective from 6th March 1984.

75.          ! Professor-cum-Project Officer, Post Graduate Centre in Ayurveda

Effective from 27th December 1983.

76.         † Special Representative, Kerala House, New Delhi.

Effective from 13th June 1984.

77.         ~ Chairman, Water Appellate Authority

This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from
2nd July 1979.

*78.       Tribunal for Disciplinary Proceedings, Trivandrum.

*79.       Enquiry Commissioner and Special Judge, Trivandrum.

*80.       Enquiry Commissioner and Special Judge, Thrissur.

               * Effective  from 10th February 1987.

81.         ** The University Appellate Tribunal, Thiruvananthapuram.

Effective  from 15th December 1987.

82.          # Director, Kerala Urban Development Project.

Effective  from 22nd December 1992.

@ [G O(P) No. 758/1984/Fin., Dated  22/12/1984]

! [G O(P) No. 107/1985/Fin., Dated 22/02/1985]

† [G O(P) No. 849/1986/Fin., Dated 29/11/1986]

~ [G O(P) No. 16/1987/Fin., Dated  06/01/1987]

*[G O(P) No. 403/1988/Fin., Dated 07/06/1988]

**[G O(P) No. 794/1992/Fin., Dated 31/10/1992]

# [G O(P)No. 925/1995/Fin., Dated 01/12/1995]

298

APPENDIX II ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

83.          ! Director, Higher Secondary Education.
Effective  from 19th March 1994.

84.      † State Librarian, Trivandrum Public Library.

            Effective  from 9th March 1988.

85.      # Land Use Commissioner

       Note.- In the case of officers who are not subordinates to any of the above
heads  of  departments,  questions  which  call  for  disposal  by  heads  of

departments  should  be  referred  to  the  Secretary  to  Government  in  the

department concerned.

! [G O(P) No. 955/1995/Fin., Dated  06/12/1995]

† [G O(P) No. 985/1997/Fin., Dated  04/11/1997]

# [Inserted G O(P) No. 632/2010/Fin., Dated 25/11/2010 (with effect from 07/02/2007)]

299

APPENDIX III ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

APPENDIX    III

RULES  RELATING  TO  CHARGE  OF  OFFICE

(Referred to in Rule 23 of Part I)

PART I

Charge of Office

1.           Unless for special recorded reasons (which must be of a public nature) the

authority under whose orders the transfer takes place permits or requires it

to be made in any  particular case elsewhere, or otherwise, the  charge of an
office  must  be  made  over  at  its  headquarters,  both  the  relieving  and  the

relieved officers being present.

2.           The condition imposed by this rule that both the relieving and the relieved

officers  must  be  present  is  not  enforced  in  the  case  of  officers  who  are

permitted to combine vacation or gazetted holidays with leave.

                 (a)   When they are prefixed to leave the outgoing officer will report, before

leaving headquarters, or  if  for  urgent reasons the leave is granted

during vacation, or holidays, as soon as it is granted  that he makes

over charge with effect from the end of the vacation or holidays.  The

relieving officer will then take over charge at the end of the vacation or

holidays in the ordinary way.

                 (b)   When they are affixed to leave the officer to be relieved will make over

charge in the ordinary way before the vacation or holidays, the incoming

officer on return at the end of the vacation or holidays, taking over

charge with effect from the beginning of the  vacation or holidays.

3.         The headquarters of any other officer is either the station which has been

declared to be his headquarters by the authority which appoints him, or, in

the absence of such declaration, the station where the records  of his office

are kept.

300

APPENDIX III ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

PART II

Leaving  Jurisdiction

                   1.    No officer (other than a Police Officer acting within his legal powers) is

entitled to pay or allowances for any time he may spend beyond the

limits of his charge without proper authority.

                   2.    Heads of Departments and Heads of Offices may authorise any officer or

subordinate under their control to proceed on duty beyond the limits of

his charge but within their own jurisdiction.

                    3.   The sanction of Government is required for any officer  proceeding

beyond the limits of the State.

               Ruling

            This rule will not be applicable to a case where an Officer is summoned to

attend a court outside the State.  He should, however, inform his controlling

officer before he leaves station.

301

APPENDIX IV ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

APPENDIX   IV

RULES  REGULATING  GRANT  OF  SPECIAL  PAY
AND  COMPENSATORY  ALLOWANCES

[Referred to in Rule 12 (31) and Rule 44 of Part I]

            In the service rules  provision is made for grant of special  pay [Rule 12

(31), Part I] and compensatory allowances (Rule 44, Part I).

              The additional pay and allowances granted to officers under these rules

will be sub-divided into the following classes:-

              Class          I       (a)  Special  pay in lieu of higher time scale of pay

                                         (b)  Special pay for specifically arduous nature of work

                  Class            II         Special pay for work in addition to the normal duties attached

to  the post

               †This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st

July 1968.

              Class         III     [Deleted]

              Class         IV      Mofussil (Compensatory allowance) hill stations

              Class         V       *Class V: Deleted

              Class         VI      Miscellaneous (compensatory allowance)

          Class I.- Special pay in this class are assigned to posts to which special

responsibility is attached or which involve work of a specially difficult and

arduous  nature.    No  special  pay  of  this  class  will  be  granted  unless  the

particular duties for which an allowance is claimed so far differ, in kind or in

intensity, from those for the performance of which the service in question

was recruited, as to justify a special remuneration.

†[G O(P) No. 393/1975/Fin., Dated 30/08/1975]
* [G O(P) No. 252/2002/Fin., Dated  25/04/2002]

302

APPENDIX IV ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

              Class II.-  The cardinal rule which the Government have adopted is that

every officer to whom a variety of duties is assigned or to whose post a

number of duties is attached should carry out those duties without extra

remuneration unless they involve more than a  reasonable days work.  In

this respect Government are merely giving effect to Rule 14, Part I.

                If the volume of work assigned to an officer is more than a full day’s

work the most suitable course is either to increase the staff, should

the  amount  of  work,  justify  a  fresh  whole  time  appointment,  or  to

redistribute  the  work  among  the  members  of  the  sanctioned  staff.

Special pay in this class will be granted only when neither of these

alternatives is possible.

               The grant of a special pay under this class will be restricted to cases which

strictly satisfy the following test :-

                 If the duties are of a kind outside the normal duties of the service, is in  addition

to the normal work of the service, which the performance of these duties involve

really so material as to justify the grant of a separate  remuneration in order to

secure the contended discharge of those duties by the staff.

  Note.- The allowance sanctioned to the Typists and Stenographers with

higher qualification in Typewriting and Shorthand,  as the case may

be, shall however be treated as ‘Special pay’ falling under this class.

               Government Decision No. 1

                 *The Supervisory allowance of ````` 15 per mensem sanctioned to Head Typists
in the scale of pay of Upper Division Typist will be classified as Class II

Special Pay under Appendix IV, Kerala Service Rules.

* [G O(P) No. 615/1964/Fin., Dated  31/08/1964]

303

APPENDIX IV ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

               Government Decision No. 2

              †The Supervisory allowance of ````` 15 per mensem sanctioned to Head Clerks
and Head Accountants will be classified as special pay under Appendix IV,

Kerala Service Rules.

               Class III.- [Deleted]

              Class IV.-  The localities which have been recognised as hilly to justify

special compensatory allowance are:-

                   1.    Portions of Devicolom, Peermade, Udumbanchola, Pathanamthitta,

Pathanapuram, Nedumangad and Neyyattinkara Taluks referred to

in para 1, under ‘A Class I Tracts’ in Appendix IX.

                      # This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with  effect

from 2nd February 1970.

                  2.    The hill stations of Chalakudy and Trichur referred to in Appendix IX.

                  3.    *Omitted with effect from 9th March 1981.

                 4.    The Wayanad and Attapady Valley.

                   Compensatory allowance as specified below shall be granted to officers

stationed in the hill stations specified above.

              5.   ! The area comprising the whole of Idukki Village and the portions of

Velliamattom and Arakulam Village in Thodupuzha Taluk having the

boundaries specified as item 6 under the heading “A Class I Tracts” in

Appendix IX.

†[G O(P) No. 150/1958/Fin., Dated 23/06/1958  and
   G O(P)  No. 825/1964/Fin., Dated 28/12/1964]

# [G O(P) No. 576/1975/Fin., Dated  27/12/1975]

*, ! [G O(P) No. 159/1981/Fin., Dated  09/03/1981]

304

APPENDIX IV ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

                        This item shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from

9th March 1981.

                            * Class                                                           Rate of compensatory
allowance per month

              Officers whose salary is upto and including ````` 800                          60

              Officers whose salary is above ````` 800 but below ````` 1,500                80

              Officers whose salary is ````` 1,500 and above

                        100

  Explanation :(1) The salary referred to in this paragraph means the salary
drawn in the scale of pay as revised on or after 1st July, 1983.

                         (2) In the case of those who have opted to remain in the pre-

revision  scale  of  pay,  the  salary  for  the  purpose  of

determining the compensatory allowance shall be calculated

by adding to the pay in the pre-revision scale, the dearness
allowance admissible at 488 points indicated in Appendix –
II to pay revision G.O. (P) 515/85/Fin., dated 16th September
1985, which was merged in  the pay, with effect from 1st July
1983.

                                *Effective from 1st July 1985.

              Ruling

             # The term “Salary” denotes “pay” as defined in Rule 12 (23), Kerala Service

Rules, Part I.

                This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st

January 1966.

              Class V .- deleted**.

* [G O(P) No. 1109/1987/Fin., Dated  23/12/1987]
# [G O(P) No. 72/1972/Fin., Dated 09/03/1972]
**[Deletion G O(P) No. 252/2002/Fin., Dated 25/04/2002]

305

APPENDIX IV ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

               Class VI.- Miscellaneous.-  The allowances admissible under this class

are  (a) Uniform allowance, (b) Dhobi allowance (c)  Allowance to Medical

men to compensate for loss of private practice, (d) Security Allowance,

(e)  Allowance for higher qualification (f) Allowances granted to officers

deputed for training and (g) Other compensatory allowances.

  Note.-    In  cases  where  the  period  of  training  exceeds  three  months,

compensatory  allowance  will  be  granted  to  the  different  classes  of

officers deputed for training outside the State at the following rates,

namely:-

   @  Category of Officers

Rates for
cities of  New
Delhi, Mumbai
and Kolkata
(Per month)

Rates for other
Places

(Per month)

(1)

              Officers of the First Grade

              Officers of the Second Grade:

             (a)   Officers whose actual pay is
````` 7,500 and above but below
````` 9000

             (b)   Officers whose actual pay is
````` 4800 and above but below
````` 7500
              Officers of the Third Grade

              Officers of the Fourth Grade

`````

(2)

 900

800

650

575

525

@ [Substitutions G O(P) No. 62/2006/Fin., Dated 07/02/2006]

306

`````

(3)

750

650

525

425

350

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
APPENDIX IV ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

                This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 3rd

March 2004

               Government Decision No.1

                * Special pay granted under Classes I and II, Rule 4 of the Madras Manual of

Special Pay and Allowances to officers governed by the Fundamental Rules

(Madras)  should  be  treated,  after  their  option  to  Kerala  Service  Rules  as

special pay Classes I and II respectively under Appendix IV, Kerala Service

Rules.

               Government Decision No. 2

                † The various allowance mentioned below will be classified as shown against

each:-

Allowance

Classification

               1.   Post-Graduate allowance

Special pay under Class II

            2.   Allowance to Medical Officers for

visiting bi-weekly Dispensaries

     Conveyance allowance under
Class V

               3.   Project Allowance

               4.   Hill tract allowance

               5.   Headmaster’s allowance

Compensatory allowance under
Class IV

Compensatory allowance under
Class IV

Class II Special pay

                 6.    Teaching allowance (to non-clinical

staff  of Medical Colleges)

Compensatory allowance for loss of
private practice under Class VI (c)

        7.    Allowance for part time work :

* [Circular No. 38373/RB3/61/Fin., Dated 19/09/1961]

† [G O(P) No. 576/1963/Fin., Dated  07/11/1963]

307

APPENDIX IV ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

                i)   Allowance  given  to  Assistant
Surgeons  for  taking  classes  in
Auxiliary  Midwife’s  Nurse’s
Training

              ii)   Allowance  given  for  part-time
Lecturers in the Ayurveda College

           iii)   Allowance given for taking classes

in B.D.S. Course.

              iv)   Allowance  for  taking  classes  in

D.M.S. Course.

              v)   Allowance  for  taking  classes  in

Extension Training Centres.

              vi)   Allowance  for  taking  classes  in

Industrial Training Centres

         vii)   Allowance for taking classes in

Dental Hygienic Course.

           viii)   Allowance  given  to  Doctors  for

visiting Hostels.

          ix)   Allowance  given  to  Doctors  for
visiting  College  of  Physical
Education.

                x)   Allowance  given  to  Doctors  for
visiting Police Training School as
part-time Medical Officer

         xi)   Allowance  given  to  Doctors  for

visiting Raj Bhavan Dispensary

            xii)   Allowance  given  to  Doctors  for

visiting School of Optometry

308

  Compensatory allowance under
Class VI (c)

Conveyance allowance under
Class V

 
 
APPENDIX IV ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

               Government Decision No. 3

                  *The  Special Allowance  Sanctioned  to  the  Police  Personnel  and  the

corresponding categories in the  Fire Force, Prison, Forest, Excise and Vigilance

Department will be classified as compensatory  allowance under Class VI.

The personnel on deputation to the Departments, Public Sector undertakings

etc. will not be entitled to the special allowance.  But it will be admissible

during  periods of leave with allowance for a maximum period of 4 months.

*[G O(P) No. 246/1981/Fin., Dated  21/04/1981]

309

APPENDIX IV A ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

APPENDIX  IV  A

RULES  REGULATING  THE  GRANT  OF  OVERTIME

ALLOWANCE  TO  THE  STAFF  OF  DEPARTMENTS

DURING  SESSIONS  OF  THE  LEGISLATIVE

ASSEMBLY

(Vide Rule 14, Part I)

1.            *The allowance will be given to such of the staff in the following departments
who are required to sit for overtime duty during the sessions of the Legislative
Assembly at the rates sanctioned by Government by general or special orders
issued from time to time subject to the conditions specified in Rules 2 to 6:-

                 (i)   Stationery Department

                (ii)   Legislature Secretariat

              (iii)    Law Department

               (iv)   Public Relations Department

              †(v)     Radio Electrical, Civil, Mechanical and Electronics wings of the  Public

Works Department.

             #(vi)    Health  Clinic, Legislator’s Hostel and the personnel deputed from the
Medical  College,  Thiruvananthapuram  and  the  Health  Services
Department.

             (vii)    Police Department.

            (viii)    Fire Force Department.

           This Rule shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 28th

March, 1983.

2.            A person will be eligible for overtime allowance only if he has been on duty
on a working day for a minimum period of two hours before 10 a.m. or after

*[G O(P) No.157/1983/Fin., Dated 28/03/1983]
[†Substitution, # Insertion G O(P) No. 70/2010/Fin., Dated 16/02/2010
 (with effect from 16/02/2010)]

310

APPENDIX IV A ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

5.00 p.m. or for a minimum period of 3 hours on an intervening holiday during
the Assembly Session.

3.              Such members of the staff whose presence may be necessary in the interests
of work shall be specifically required in writing by the Head of Department/
Office or by his immediate subordinate Gazetted Officer to attend office
earlier and/or to stay longer or to attend office on holiday.  Only individuals
who have been so directed will be eligible for overtime allowance.

4.          The following certificate will be signed by the drawing officer in the bills

claiming overtime allowance -

                 “Certified that Sri……………. ………….. was required under specific orders
to sit late in office/to attend office early on……………………..or to attend
office on Sunday/……………………….holiday and was detained from.………
……a.m to ………………….. a.m./p.m………………..to ……………….p.m. for
disposal of urgent work relating to the Legislative Assembly.

          Also certified that the amount claimed by Sri……………………..is in
accordance  with the rates prescribed in the rules in Appendix IV A of the
Kerala Service Rules.”

5.               Members of the staff who are eligible for allowance in accordance with these
rules will not be eligible for any other additional remuneration, conveyance/
hire charges or compensation leave for the performance of the same duties.

6.              The  allowance    will  be  classified  as  ‘honorarium’  and  will  be  drawnin
establishment/salary bills.  In the case of Gazetted Officers, the allowance
will be authorised by the Accountant General on certificates furnished by
the  Head of Department/Office or by his immediate subordinate  Gazetted
Officer.

7.              A register showing details of overtime work done, allowance paid therefore,

etc., will be maintained in Form No. 14.

               *Effective from 11th June 1963.

*[G O(P) No. 602/1963/Fin., Dated  02/12/1963]

311

APPENDIX V ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

APPENDIX  V

LIST  OF  RECOGNISED  *TUBERCULOSIS,  LEPROSY  AND  CANCER
INSTITUTIONS  AND  MENTAL  HOSPITALS  FOR  PURPOSES
OF  GRANT  OF  EXTRA ORDINARY  LEAVE  TO  OFFICERS
NOT  IN  PERMANENT  EMPLOY

(Referred to in Note 3 under Rule 90 of Part I)

PART I

Tuberculosis  Institutions

(a)          Within Kerala

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

K.V. Sanatorium, Mulankunnathukavu

T.B.  Sanatorium, Pariyaram

T.B.  Centre, Trivandrum.

T.B.  Hospital, Pulayanarkottah.

T.B.  Clinic, Palluruthy

Do.              Kottayam.

Do.              Trichur

Do.              Kozhikkode

T.B. Seal Ward, Alleppey

Do.             Ayyampally

Do.             Alwaye

Do.             Palluruthy

Do.             Chittoor.

T.B. Clinic, Alleppey

 Do.             Karunagappally

Do.              Palghat

*[G O(P) 570/1978/Fin., Dated. 11/07/1978]

312

APPENDIX V ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

17.        Do.            Muvattupuzha

18.        Do.            Cannanore

19.        Do.            Kozhencherry

20.        Do.            Kottarakkara

21.        T.B. Clinic,  Karuvatta

22.        T.B. diagnostic Centre, Quilon

23.        T.B. Isolation Ward, District Hospital, Palghat.

24.        Do.             Cannanore

25.        Do.              Government Hospital, Chirayinkil

26.        T.B. Seal Ward, Muvattupuzha

27.        Do.             Palai

28.        Do.             Chengannur

29.        Do.             Kozhencherry

30.        Do.             Chalakkudy

31.        Do.             Mavelikkara

32.        Do.             Changanacherry

33.        Do.             Mannarghat

(b)       Outside Kerala

1.          Madar Union Sanatorium, Madar, Ajmer, Merwara.

2.          Reid Provincial Sanatorium, Shillong

3.          Municipality Tuberculosis Hospital, Civil and Military Station, Bangalore.

4.          Government Tuberculosis Sanatorium, Bangalore Cantt.

5.          S.B. Dey Sanatorium, Kurseong

6.         Jadabpur Tuberculosis Hospital, Jadabpur

7.          Itki Sanatorium, Itki.

313

APPENDIX V ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

8.            Turner Sanatorium, Bhoiwada Hill, Parel, Bombay.

9.            The Bel-Air Sanatorium, Delkeith, Panchgani

10.          Hillside Sanatorium, Gengurla

11.          The Salvation Army Tuberculosis Hospital,  Anand, District Kaira

12.          Wanless Tuberculosis Sanatorium, Wanlesswadi, District Satara

13.          Pendra Road Sanatorium, Pendra Road, Madhya Pradesh

14.          The Nagpur Tuberculosis Clinic, New Delhi

15.          Silver Jubilee Tuberculosis Hospital, Kingsway, Delhi

16.          The New Delhi Tuberculosis Clinic, New Delhi

17.         Union Mission Tuberculosis Sanatorium, Arogyavaram.

18.          Visrantipuram Sanatorium, Rajamundry

19.          Government Tuberculosis Sanatorium, Tambaram, Madras.

20.          Coimbatore District Jubilee Tuberculosis Sanatorium, Perundurai

21.         Government Tuberculosis Hospital, Royapettah, Madras City.

22.          The King Edwrd Sanatorium, Dharombur (Simla Hills)

23.          Lady Irwin Tuberculosis Sanatorium, Jubar

24.          Lady Linlithgow Sanatorium, Kassuli

25.          Raj Bahadur Sir Gujarmal Kesradevi Tuberculosis Sanatorium, Amritsar

26.          King Edward VII Sanatorium, Bhowali.

27.         Tuberculosis Clinic attached to the Calcutta Medical College, Calcutta.

28.          Shree Padmavatidevi Sanatorium, Baroda City.

29.          Ganga Golden Jubilee Tuberculosis Dispensary and Hospital, Bikaner

30.          Tuberculosis Hospital, Lingamapalli, Hyderabad.

31.          Princes Krishna Jammanni Sanatorium, Mysore City

32.         Tuberculosis Hospital, Nagercoil, Madras State

314

APPENDIX V ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

Tuberculosis Government Hospital, Kanchrapra

The Tuberculosis Department of the Government Headquarters Hospital,
Trichinopoly.

Rajaji Tuberculosis Sanatorium, Trichinopoly

Santosham Memorial Tuberculosis Sanatorium, Tambaram, Madras.

The Municipal Tuberculosis Dispensary, Civil and Military Station, Bangalore

The Kasturba Tuberculosis Clinic and Hospital, Lucknow.

Government Tuberculosis Institute, Madras

Government Headquarters Hospital, Coimbatore

Government Headquarters Hospital, Tanjore

Government Erskine Hospital, Mathurai

Government King George Hospital, Visakhapatnam.

Government General Hospitals, Madras.

Government Wellesley Tuberculosis Sanatorium, Bellary.

Telegaon General Hospital and Convalescent Home, Telegaon (Dabhade—
District Poona)

47.           Victoria Jubilee Hospital, Amritsar

48.

49.

King George Medical College Hospital, Lucknow.

Patna Medical College Hospital

50.           Tuberculosis Clinic, Jubbulpoor

51.           Tuberculosis clinic, Queens Road, Delhi

52.

53.

54.

55.

Ramakrishna Mission Free Tuberculosis Clinic, Karol Bagh, Delhi

Group of Hospital for Tuberculosis, Bombay

Central T.B. Clinic, Kanpur

Hospital for Diseases of the Chest Camp, Aundh, Poona

315

APPENDIX V ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

K.M.R. Bangu T.B. Sanatorium, Digri, Midnapur

Government T.B. Clinic, Mandi

Himachal Pradesh Sanatorium, Mandhodhar, Near Dharambur

Karnataka Health Institute, Hospital and Sanatorium, Ghataprabha (Belgaum
District)

V.C. Nath T. B. Sanatorium, Bharatpur

Ramakrishna Mission T.B. Sanatorium, Ranchi (Bihar)

Sriram Chandra Bhanji Medical College Hospital, Cuttack

T.B. Sanatorium, Dakpathan (District Dehra Dum)

T.B. Sanatorium, Jaipur

T.B. Clinic, Jodhpur

66.           M.G. Hospital, Jodhpur

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

74.

75.

76.

77.

T.B. Hospital, Iramumna

T.B. Sanatorium, Vikarabad (Anathgiri)

T.B. Clinic, Dapirpura.

T.B. Clinic, Patiala, Punjab

Hardinge Sanatorium, Dharampur (Simla Hills)

K.J. Mehta T.B. Hospital, Amargadh (via. Songadh), Bombay

T.B. Ward, J.A. Hospital, Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh

T.B. Wards, M.T. Hospital, Indore, Madhya Pradesh

T.B. Sanatorium, Rao Indore, Madhya Pradesh

S.D.S. Sanatorium, Bangalore

T.B. Clinic, Allahabad

78.            The Coimbatore Tuberculosis Sanatorium, Peelamedu P.O., Avanashi Road,

Coimbatore

79.

Lala Ram Sarup Tuberculosis Hospital, Mehrauli (Delhi)

316

APPENDIX V ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

80.

Rocky Mount Sanatorium, Ara P.G. Mankum (near Ranchi)

81.            Mahatma Gandhi Memorial T.B. Sanatorium, Sangipa, Tanjore District

82.

83.

84.

Medical Ward (T.B.) attached to the R.G. Ker Medical College Hospital,
Calcutta

    T.B. Hospital, Uditnarayanbur (near Bhowani, Patna, Orissa)

    Brij Sewa Samiti T.B. Sanatorium, Vrindaban (Mathura)

85.           The Government Welfare Fund T.B. Hospital, Nellore (Andhra)

86.

87.

88.

89.

Bhabendra Bala Chest Clinic, Serampore (West Bengal)

T.B. Clinic, Chemba

C.D. Hospital, Srinagar

C.D. Hospital, Jammu

PART II

Leprosy Institutions

(a)           Within Kerala

1.             Leprosy Sanatorium, Noornad

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

Leprosy Sanatorium, Koratty

Leprosy Treatment Centre, Kayamkulam

Leprosy Treatment Centre, Haripad

Leprosy Subsidiary Centre, Ponnani

Leprosy Subsidiary Centre, Baliapatam

Mission Leprosy Sanatorium, Chevayur

The Poor Home Society Leprosy Home, Kozhikkode.

b)           Outside Kerala

1.            Bethesad Leprosy Hospital, Nerespur, West Godavary District

2.             The Salvation Army Leprosy Hospital, Babatla, Guntur District

317

APPENDIX V ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

3.           Leprosy Hospital, Keserapalla, Krishna District

4.           Leprosy Hospital, Salure, Srikakulam District

5.           Leprosy Home, Vizianagram,  Vishakapatnam District

6.           Leprosy Home and Hospital, Ramachandrapuram (East Godavari District)

7.           A.L.C. Mission Leprosy Hospital, Kodur, Cuddapah District

8.           Leprosy Clinic, Karwan

9.           Leprosy Hospital, Dichpally

10.         Leprosy Colony, Zeheerbad

11.         Leprosy Colony, Narayanpet

12.         Santipara Leprosy Colony, P.O. Bengaingaon (Goalpara District)

13.         Christian Leprosy Colony, P.O. Barpheta, Jorhat

14.         Seldeha Leper Colony (Santhal Parganas)

15.         The Acworth Leprosy Home and Clinic, Vadaia Bombay No.31

16.         The Leprosy Hospital, Sholapur

17.         The Sasson Hospital, Poona (O.P.D.)

18.         The Leprosy Hospital, Polarpur (District Kolaba)

19.         The Anti-Leprosy Clinic, Ambewadi South, Satara District

20.         The Shenda Park Leprosy Colony, Kolhapur

21.         The Kegrapeth Leprosy Hospital, Ahmedabad

22.         Leprosy Colony, Osmanbad

23.         Kothara Leprosy Home, P.O. Achalpur (District Amarvathi)

24.         Jagadamba Kustha Nivar, Amarvati

25.         Dattabur Leprosy Colony, P.O. Nalwadi (District Wardha)

26.         Leprosy Colony, Warora, District Chanda.

27.         Isolation  Colony, Kashikhed P.O., Dhamangaon,, District Amarvati

28.         Leper Asylum, Adhewada, Bhavangar

318

APPENDIX V ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

29.          Leper Clinic, Punagadh

30.          Government Leprosy Hospital, Schore

31.          Leprosy Home, Banganga, Indore

32.

33.

34.

Leprosy Home, Ujjain

Leprosy Home, Rajgarah

Henderson Memorial Leper Home, Dhar

35.           Chandkhuri Leprosy Home and Hospital, P.O. Baitapur (District Bilaspur)

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

Bethesda Leprosy Asylum, Champa (District Bilaspur)

Shantipur Leprosy Asylum, P.O.  Shantipur (District Rajpur)

Rajnandgaon Leprosy Home and Clinic, District Durg

Government Leprosy  Home and Hospital,  Raipur

Brehepada Leprosy colony, Narayanapur (District Bastar)

Chittalanka Leprosy Colony, Dartewara, (District Bastar)

Government Lady Willingdon Leprosy Sanatorium, Tirumani, Chingelput

Government Children’s Leprosy Sanatorium, Madras.

St. Mary’s Leprosy Hospital, Kumbakonam (Tanjore District)

Dayapuram Leprosy Hospital and Home, Manamadura (Ramanad District)

46.          Kasturba Gandhi Kusta Nivarana Nilayam, Mazhavanthangal (South Arcot

District)

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

St. Joseph’s Leprosy Home, Tuticorin  (Tirunelveli District)

Government Leprosy Treatement Unit, Tirukoilur  Leprosy Colony, Imphal.

Government Leper Asylum, Magadi  Road, Bangalore.

The Silver Jubilee Leprosy Hospital, Sankeshwar (District Belgaum)

The Leprosy Hospital, Hindaalgi (District Belgaum)

St.Josheph’s  Leprosy  Hospital  and Asylum,  Kankaredy  (South  Kanara
District)

319

APPENDIX V ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

Leprosy Home and Hospital, Cuttack

Leprosy Asylum, Baripada

Leprosy Hospital, Subatu

Leprosy Home, Palampur (Kangra District)

Leprosy Clinic attached to V.M. Hospital, Agart

Naini Leprosy Hospital and Home, Naini (Allahabad)

Leprosy  Hospital  under  the  Gandhi  Memorial  and Associated  Hospital,
Lucknow

60.

Maclaren Leper Hospital, Dehradun

61.            Srimati Bhagwan Dei Leper Hospital, Kanpur

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

74.

75.

Leprosy Home and Hospital,  Almora

Leprosy Home and Hospital, Chaudag, Almora District

Skin and V.D. Dept., S.N. Hospital, Agra

Leprosy Home and Hospital, Zamuratgang, Faizabad

Skin Dispensary, K.E. Hospital, Banares

The State Leper Hospital, Baharaich

Gouripore Leprosy Colony, Bankura

Leprosy Home, Bankura

Silda Leprosy Clinic, Midnapure

Griffiths Leprosy Colony, Midnapur

Municipal Charitable Leprosy Clinic, Burdwan

Asansol Leprosy Settlement, Asansol

Raniganj Leprosy Home, Burdwan District

Krishnagar Leprosy Clinic, Nadia District

76.           Leprosy Clinic, Howrah

320

APPENDIX V ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

Behrampore Leprosy Clinic, Murshidabad District

Kalimpong Leprosy Colony, Darjeeling District

Alber Victor Leprosy Hospital, Calcutta

Leprosy Outpatient Dept., School of Tropical Medicine, Calcutta

Premananda Leprosy Clinic, Maniktala

Premananda Leprosy Clinic, Kalighat

Sriniketan Leprosy Clinic, Birhum District

Purutia Leper Asylum (Manbhum District)

                 *APPENDIX VI (Omitted)

*[G O (P) 65/2007/Fin., Dated 19/02/2007]

321

APPENDIX VII ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

APPENDIX VII

RULES  RELATING  TO  CASUAL  LEAVE

(Referred to in Rule 111 of Part I)

1.            Casual leave is not provided for in the rules as it is not recognised as leave.
Technically therefore an officer on casual leave is not treated as absent from
duty  and  his  pay  and  allowances  are  not  intermitted.    The  grant  of  such
leave need not be reported to the Audit Officer, nor is it necessary for the
officer to submit charge certificates when he proceeds on or returns from
casual leave.

2.             *(i)    No officer may in any case be absent on casual leave for  more than
twenty days in the course of one calendar year.  But the members of
the teaching staff of educational institutions shall be eligible for
casual leave only for fifteen days in a calendar year.

              *(ii)    All officers including teaching staff of educational institutions may
be  allowed  to  combine  casual  leave  with  Sundays  and  other
authorised holidays provided that the resulting  period of absence
from duty shall not exceed fifteen days at a stretch. The fact that a
maximum has been fixed for the amount of casual leave which may
be taken within a year, does not mean that an officer is entitled to
take the full amount of casual leave as a matter of course.

  †Exception:- The maximum period of absence combining casual leave with
Sundays  and other authorised holidays will be twenty days at a stretch
for the State Government employees working in New Delhi.

               (iii)    All officers including those who have put in less than a year’s service
will be allowed casual leave at the rate of  20 days during a year without
taking into account the length of service put in by them subject to the
discretion of the sanctioning authority :

*[GO(P) No. 648/1978/Fin., Dated  24/08/1978]
†[G O(P) No. 51/1989/Fin., Dated  30/01/1989]

322

APPENDIX VII ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

              *Provided that the teaching staff of educational institutions may be granted

casual leave for fifteen days only during a year.

               † The amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st

January 1970.

3.           An officer requiring casual leave should take the orders of the head of his

office for such absence.  When the head of an office requires casual leave,

he may take the leave and report the fact to his immediate superior authority.

Heads of Departments should intimate their intention of taking casual leave

to Government in the department concerned.  In cases in which the casual

leave  is  intended  to  be  spent  outside  the  jurisdiction  of    the  officer,  the

previous sanction of the competent authority should be obtained.

4.            # A Casual Leave Register shall be maintained in every office in !Form No.19.
When an Officer is transferred from one department/ office/section to another,

the Controlling Officer of the former shall forward the extract of Casual Leave

Register pertaining to the Officer, duly authenticated, to the latter.  No Officer

shall  be  granted  further  casual  leave  during  the  rest  of  the  calendar  year

before getting the above extract.

5.                 (i)    An officer may be allowed causal leave for half a day at his request,

provided that casual leave for half a day shall not be granted to the

staff of the department of Museums and Zoos who work in shifts.

             **(ii)    Casual leave for half a day at a time may be granted to the technical

staff of  Government presses who have to work in the first shift that

*[G O(P) No. 622/1979/Fin., Dated 19/07/1979]

†[G O(P) No. 844/1970/Fin., Dated  05/12/1970]
#[Substitution G O(P) No.637/2010/Fin., Dated  25/11/2010 (with effect  from 25/11/2010)]

![Substitution G O(P) No. 465/2012/Fin., Dated 17/08/2012 (with effect from 17/08/2012)]
**[G O(P) No. 505/1977/Fin., Dated 07/12/1977]

323

APPENDIX VII ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

is from 8 a.m. to  4.30 p.m. with a  noon  interval of one hour between
1 p.m. and 2 p.m..  In respect  of the second shift half day casual
leave may be allowed only for the second half of the shift that is
from 9 to 11.30 p.m.

6.        † Casual leave cannot ordinarily be taken in combination with any leave
recognised  by  the  rules,  with  joining  time  or  with  vacation.  Heads  of
Departments  may,  however,  sanction  such  combination  in  special  cases,
provided there is no evasion of rules,  for instance, when an officer obliged
to be absent owing to the prevalence of infectious disease in his residence
and placed on special casual leave, himself contracts the illness and has to
be granted regular leave in continuation.

7.          Casual leave, not being recognised as leave, cannot be retrospectively
commuted into any other kind of leave, but when an officer who proceeded
on casual leave under the ordinary circumstances takes some other kind
of leave in continuation, such leave will be held to have commenced from
the date on which he proceeded on casual leave.

8.            Deleted

SECTION II

SPECIAL  CASUAL  LEAVE

1.           Special Casual leave not counted against ordinary causal leave may be

granted to an officer in the  following circumstances :

                   (i)   When he is ordered by the head of his office to absent himself from
duty on the certificate of a medical officer or sanitary authority on
account  of  the  presence  of  infectious  disease  in  his  residence
*provided  no  substitute  is  appointed  and  no  extra  cost  to
Government  is  involved.  If,  however,  a  substitute  is  necessary,
ordinary leave debitable to the leave account of the officer should be

†[G O(P) No. 863/1978/Fin., Dated 18/12/1978]

*[G O(P) No. 164/1974/Fin., Dated  17/07/1974   with effect from 01/03/1997]

324

APPENDIX VII ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  & II

granted. The grant of special casual leave involving the appointment
of substitute in all other cases requires the sanction of  Government;
which will be accorded only when the absence is for less than 30 days
and the subordinate concerned draws a pay of less than *````` 16180 per
mensem, and has no ordinary leave to his credit.  This  amendment
shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st July
2009.

                Note 1.-  When the officer himself catches the infection, regular leave under

the rules must be taken for the period of absence.

  Note 2.- The following diseases are treated as infectious diseases for the

purpose  of the grant of special casual leave:-

            1)     Smallpox

            2)    † Deleted

            3)     Plague

            4)     Cholera

            5)     Typhoid

            6)     Acute influenzal Pneumonia

            7)     Diphtheria

            8)     Cerebro-spinal meningitis

   Note 3.- Leave under this head shall not ordinarily be granted for a period
exceeding 21 days, but in exceptional cases it may be granted upto 30
days.

    Note  4.-  Special casual leave taken in any circumstances may be allowed to

be combined with ordinary leave or ordinary casual leave.

* [Substitution G O(P) No. 406/2013/Fin., Dated  27/08/2013]
† [G O(P) No. 189/1976/Fin., Dated  05/07/1976]

325

APPENDIX VII ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

  * Note 5.- The heads of offices will also be eligible for special casual leave

under the Rules.

               (ii)    When  he  is  summoned  to  serve  as  a  juror  or  assessor  or  to  give
evidence  before a court as a witness in civil or criminal cases in
which his private interests are not in issue, the leave to cover the
total period  absence necessary.

             (iii)  When he is permitted to attend the meetings of a University, or to
undertake  any  other  work  connected  with  a  University,  leave  to
cover the period of absence from duty.

                    But  if  he  takes  up  examinership  in  University  Examination  and  accepts
remuneration at the instance of Government, his absence will be treated as
duty and if the work is not taken at the instance of Government, he will have
to  avail himself of eligible leave.

  # Note.-  In the case of University examinations conducted by the Universities
in Kerala, the examinership offered by one University to the teaching
staff of colleges under another University and accepted by them will
be treated as taking up examinership at the instance of Government for
the purpose of this rule.

  This Note shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 18th

February 1981.

             (iv)  When he is bitten by a rabid animal, or if it becomes necessary to
undergo anti-rabic treatment due to infection during  post-mortem
examination or other similar causes, leave to cover the actual period
required for treatment (14 days) and for the journeys to and from
the nearest anti-rabic treatment centre.

                (v)    [Deleted]

*[G O(P) No. 164/1974/Fin., Dated 17/07/1974]
# [G O(P) No. 167/1982/Fin., Dated  06/04/1982]

326

APPENDIX VII ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

          (vi)  When an officer in the last grade is temporarily incapacitated on

account of typhoid and cholera inoculation leave for one day.

*(vii)    (a)   A male Government employee who undergoes vasectomy
operation for the first time will be granted special casual
leave  for  a  period  not  exceeding  six  working  days.
Intervening Sundays and closed holidays will be ignored
while calculating the period of special casual leave. Special
casual  leave  for  a  period  not  exceeding  6  days  will  be
granted for undergoing vasectomy operation for the second
time also on production of a medical certificate from the
prescribed  medical  authority  to  the  effect  that  the  first
operation was a failure  and that the second operation was
actually performed.

  (b)   A  female  Government  servant    who  undergoes  sterilisation
operation will be granted special casual leave for a period not
exceeding 14 days :

              Provided that special casual leave for undergoing tubectomy operation
for  the  second  time  will  be  granted  only  on  production  of  a  medical
certificate from the prescribed medical authority to the effect that the
first operation was a failure and that the second operation was actually
performed.

  (c)   A  male  Government  servant  whose  wife  undergoes  a  gyno-
sterilisation (tubectomy operation without delivery) will be granted
special casual leave for a period not exceeding 7 days subject to
production of a medical certificate from the medical officer who
actually performs the operation.

  (d)    An Officer undergoing treatment due to complication arising from

sterilisation operation shall be granted special casual leave to

* [G O(P) No. 381/1983/Fin., Dated  08/07/1983]

327

APPENDIX VII ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

           cover the period of such treatment based on the certificate of the

medical authority:

            Provided that if the Government servant is not hospitalised the period of
special casual leave granted will be limited to 7 days in the case of male
officers and 14 days in the case of female officers.

               Ruling

                 Special casual leave under this rule may be combined with holidays provided
that the total period of absence from duty does not exceed ten days.

              (viii)  Women employees who undergo I.U.C.D.  insertion will be granted

special casual leave for the day of insertion.

                         *Special casual leave will be granted on the day of I.U.C.D.—re-insertion

also.

                  (ix)   When an officer as member of a staff council has to attend a meeting of
the council, he will be granted special casual leave for the days required
for the journey from his place of duty to the place of the meeting of the
council and back.

†(x-a)  Special casual leave will be granted to women Government
employees  having  less  than  three  children  for  undergoing
medical termination of pregnancy.  The leave shall be granted
only once in their service and shall be for a period of six days
including the day on which medical termination of pregnancy
is  conducted.

*(x-b)    Female  Government  employees  who  undergo  salpingectomy
operation after Medical Termination of Pregnancy (MTP) may be
granted special casual leave for a period not exceeding 14 days.

*[G O(P) No. 381/1983/Fin., Dated  08/07/1983]

†[G O(P) No. 388/1976/Fin., Dated 16/12/1976]

328

APPENDIX VII ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PAR T I  &  II

*(x-c)  Male Government employees whose wives undergo tubectomy/
salpingectomy operation after Medical Termination of Pregnancy
(MTP) may be granted   special casual leave upto 7 days subject
to the production of medical certificate stating that their wives
have  undergone  tubectomy/salpingectomy  operation  after
Medical Termination of Pregnancy.  It shall not be  necessary
to state in the certificate that the presence of the Government
employee  is  required  to  look  after  the  wife  during  her
convalescence.

                 †(xi)     An officer who is a member of the Indian Institute of Public Administration
may  be  granted  special  casual  leave  to  attend  any  meeting/seminar
organised by the regional or local branch of the said Institute and for the
days  required  for  the  journey  from  their  place  of  duty  to  the  place  of
meeting/seminar and back.

        (xii) (i)   A Government officer who has lost all male children or all female
children after vasectomy/tubectomy operation  performed earlier;
may be granted special casual leave for undergoing recanalisation
operation upto a period of 21 days or actual period of hospitalisation
as certified by the authorised  medical attendant, whichever is less.
Special casual leave shall also be granted for the minimum journey
period required and spent for the to and fro journey for undergoing
the operation.

               (ii)  The grant of special casual leave shall be subject to the following

conditions, namely:-

    (a)    the operation has been performed in a hospital or  a medical college

or an institution where facilities for recanalisation are available.

  (b)    the request for the grant of special casual leave shall be supported
by  a  medical  certificate  from  the  doctor  who  performed  the
operation to the effect that hospitalisation of the officer for the

*[G O(P) No. 381/1983/Fin., Dated  08/07/1983]
†[G O(P) No. 45/1977/Fin., Dated  01/02/1977]

329

APPENDIX VII ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

period  stipulated  therein  was  essential  for  operation  and  post
operational recovery.

   (iii)  *The period of absence in excess of the period of special casual
leave as admissible under sub-clause (i) shall be treated as regular
leave of the kind admissible under the leave rules applicable to
the officer or ordinary casual leave as applied for by the officer.

   Note.-  Special casual leave granted under clauses (vii) to (xii) under the
Family Welfare Programme may be suffixed as well as prefixed to regular
leave or casual leave.  However, special casual leave should not be
allowed to be prefixed or suffixed both to regular leave and casual
leave.    The  intervening  holidays  and/or  Sundays  may  be  prefixed/
suffixed to regular leave, as the case may be.

2.            In the cases coming under clauses (i) to (iii) above, when the absence from
duty exceeds the period which may reasonably be treated as casual leave
under  the  discretion  vested  in  the  head  of  the  office,  the  officer  may  be
granted for the entire period of absence such regular leave with leave salary
as may be due to him and thereafter leave without allowances.  In the cases
coming under clause (iv) above the excess over one month of the period of
absence should be treated as regular leave and debited to the leave account

3.           †(a)   Special casual leave not exceeding 15 days in one calendar year may
be  granted  to  Government  servants  who  take  part  in  State
Championship  conducted  by  the  respective  State  Associations
within the State and for attending selection trials of State Teams for
participating in National Championships.

                 (b)   Special Casual leave not exceeding 45 days in one calendar year may be
granted    to  Government  servants,  who  take  part  in  National  level
championships  conducted    by All  India Associations,  for    attending
coaching  camps  of  the  State Teams  in  preparation  of  participation  in

*[G O(P) No. 381/1983/Fin., Dated  08/07/1983]
†[G O(P) No. 659/1995/Fin., Dated 10/10/1995]

330

APPENDIX VII ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

National  Championships  and  for  attending  selection  trials  of  National

Teams for participating in International Championships.

               (c)   Special Casual leave not exceeding 90 days in one calendar year may be

granted to Government servants for representing India in International

Events and for attending coaching camps of National Teams in preparation

of International Events.

                    (d)     Government officials who are office bearers in the National Federations

or Associations in sports and games and who are members of the Kerala
Sports Council may be granted special casual leave not exceeding 30

days for the days of the meeting and the minimum time required for the

to and fro journeys.

               (e)   The period of leave mentioned above shall be independent of one

another and shall be exclusive of Public holidays that may intervene.

The period  of absence in excess of the days mentioned above in

each case shall be treated as ordinary leave admissible under relevant

leave rules applicable to the Government servants concerned.  For

this purpose, officers may, as a special case, be permitted to combine

special casual leave with ordinary leave. Special casual leave shall

not, however, be granted in combination with casual leave.

                 (f)    Special casual leave shall be granted only on production of participation

certificates issued by the respective Associations and it shall be limited to

the actual period of participation, including the shortest transit period,

subject to the limits specified above.

            (g)   Government servants whose services are utilised in connection with

coaching  or  administration  of  the  teams  participating  in  the

Championships/Events  mentioned  above,  may  also  be  treated  as

members of the team for the purpose of grant of special casual leave.

331

APPENDIX VII ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

                  *(h)    Government  Officials  who  are  office  bearers  of  District  Sports

Associations and District Sports Councils shall be granted Special

Casual  Leave  not  exceeding  10  days  for  attending  meetings  of

District Sports Associations and Districts Sports Councils.

                          *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force on 5th January

1999.

  Note.-  The terms ‘State Association’, ‘State Championship’,  ‘All India

Association’, ‘National Level Championship’ and ‘International Meet/
Event’ are defined as follows:-

   (i)   State Association:-  A duly constituted body, at the State level in

respect of a particular discipline of sports/games, having district

level units as members.  It shall have the recognition of the Kerala

Sports Council.

  (ii)  State Championship:-  Inter-district or inter-zone championships/

meets of a particular game/sports conducted by the respective State

associations at State level.

  (iii)    All  India Association:-    A  duly  constituted  national  body  of  a

particular discipline of sports/games, having state level units as

members. It shall have the recognition of the Government of India.

  (iv)   National Level Championship:- A Championship/meet conducted by

the respective All India Associations at national level in which various

state teams participate.

  (v)    International  Meet/Event:-    Sports/games  conducted  at

International level in which various nations  take part.  Participation

of an Indian team with the approval of Government of India only

shall be considered as a recognised event.

*[G O(P) No. 98/2002/Fin., Dated  31/01/2002]

332

APPENDIX VII ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

4.         When an officer has to insure his life in the State Life Insurance (Official
Branch)  he  will  be  given  such  leave  of  absence  as  may  be  necessary  to
enable him to appear before a Medical Officer and to procure the required
certificate.

5.              When volunteers who are Government servants, attend camps or exercises
or attend rifle meetings with the permission of the heads of their departments
or offices, they will be considered to be on special casual leave during the
period of their absence from duty.

               Government Decision

            *The concessions allowed to ‘volunteers’ in regard to the grant of special
casual  leave  for  attending  camps,  exercises,  rifle  meetings,  etc.,  may  be
extended to scouters, guiders and  office bearers of the Bharath Scouts and
Guides Association for attending camps, conferences, rallies, etc.

                Effective from 10th June 1964.

6.            Special casual leave will be allowed to Government servants who have won
certificates  of  merit  in  the  Lok  Sahayak  Sena  and  who  are  required  to
participate in the Republic Day Parade in New Delhi for: (1) a period not
exceeding 14 days required for their stay in New Delhi in connection with the
participation in the Republic Day Parade plus (2) the minimum period required
for the journey of the Government servants from headquarters to New Delhi
and back.

7.          Special casual leave may be allowed to Doctors and Veterinarians who are
invitee members, official delegates or those who have been asked to read
papers at an All Indian Conference of the Medical or Veterinary Association
or  the  Indian  Science  Congress,  as  the  case  may  be.    The  leave  will  be
granted for attendance at the meeting and for journeys from head quarters to
the place of the meeting and back.

*[G O(P) No. 53/1965/Fin., Dated 05/02/1965]

333

APPENDIX VII ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

           The power of granting special casual leave under these orders will be
exercised by Heads of Departments and regional and district officers in
the case of officers under their administrative control.  In the case of
Heads of  Departments partaking in sporting events special casual leave
will be granted by Government.

8.            Special casual leave may be granted to Government servants appearing at
departmental promotion examinations which are neither obligatory nor
entail a condition of preferment in Government service (e.g., practical
test  for  selection  of  typists  in  service  as  Stenographers,  selective  test
for selection of last grade employees as attenders etc.) to cover the actual
duration of examination concerned plus the minimum period required for
the to and fro journey.  Such special casual leave will not, however, be
granted for appearing for the open competitive  examinations held by the
Public Service Commission and cannot be combined with ordinary casual
leave or regular leave.

9.            An accused officer, not under suspension, may be granted special casual leave
to  cover  the  actual  period  for  the  onward  and  return  journey  for  appearing
before the Disciplinary Proceedings Tribunal and the days of attendance at the
Tribunal.

  Note.- This rule will apply mutatis mutandis to accused officers called upon
to appear before a Disciplinary Authority/Enquiring Authority duly
constituted.

10.           When Government servants enlisted as Home Guards Volunteers are called out
by the Commandants General/Commandants under sections 5 (1) and 5 (2) of
the Kerala Home Guards Act, 1960, for training or to discharge any of the
duties or functions assigned to the Home Guards, they will be  considered  to
be  on  special  causal  leave  during  the  period  of  the  their  training/duty  in
Home Guards plus the minimum period required for the journey from their
headquarters to the place of training/duty and back.

334

APPENDIX VII ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

             A day’s special casual leave will be allowed every year to Government

servants  who  are  Home  Guards  Volunteers  for  participation  in  the

celebrations of Home Guards Day.

               The detention certificate issued by the Commandant General/Commandants,

Home  Guards  will  be  accepted  as  valid  authority  for  the  grant  of  special

casual leave.

11.          The period spent in transit by the civil Government servants who are called

out for training in the Defence Reserves, from the date of their relief  from the
civil  posts  to  the  date  on  which  they  report  themselves  to  the  military

authorities and vice versa will be treated as special casual leave.

                The period of transit should be limited to actual journey time as laid down in

Note 1 under Rule 125, Part I.

12.          The period of absence (including the period spent in transit) of the members

of the teaching staff of the Medical Colleges, College of Nursing and the

Dental College, on account of their appointment as Inspectors by the Indian

Medical Council, Indian Nursing Council or the Dental Council of India will

be treated as special casual leave, provided they are not paid any remuneration

for the inspection work.

              *Teaching staff of Medical Colleges who are invited by the Indian Medical

Council, Indian Council of Medical Research, All Indian Institute of Medical

Sciences, Dental Council of India and Indian Nursing Council as experts for

attending board meetings and scientific meetings will be granted special

casual leave for the days of meetings, including actual time taken for to and

fro  journeys,  provided  they  are  not  receiving  remuneration  from  the

concerned Institution. The Principals of the Medical Colleges are authorised

to grant special casual leave in such cases in respect of officers working

under them.

*[G O (P) No. 215/1982/Fin., Dated 07/05/1982]

335

APPENDIX VII ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

               *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from

8th June, 1981.

                †Auxiliary Nurse Midwives/Nurses who are members of the Indian Nursing
Council will be granted special casual leave to attend the meetings of the

Council for the days of the meetings including  actual time taken for to and

fro journeys provided they are not receiving remuneration from the Council.

The District Medical Officers of Health are authorised to grant special casual

leave in such cases in respect of officers working under them.

             †This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect

from 28th June 1984.

13.        # Ex-servicemen boarded out of service and re-employed  in Government
service  in  the  State,  if  and  when  required  to  appear  before  the  Reserve

Medical Boards for the purpose of reassessing their disability, will be granted

special casual leave for a maximum period of 15 days  including the time

spent  in  transit  both  ways.    Special  casual  leave  under  this  rule  may  be

granted on more than one occasion in a calendar year, if needed.

14.          !  Government  servants,  who  have  won  gallantry  awards  and  who  are
required  to  participate  in  the  Colour  Presentation  Ceremonies  in

connection with such awards will be granted special casual leave for the

period of their stay at the place where the ceremony is conducted and the

minimum period required for the journey from headquarters to such place

and back, subject to the condition that the total period shall not exceed

10 days.

*[G O(P) No. 215/1982/Fin., Dated 07/05/1982]

†[ G O(P) No. 954/1986/Fin., Dated 27/12/1986]
#  [G O(P) No. 174/1977/Fin., Dated 04/06/1977]

! [G O(P) No. 304/1971/Fin., Dated 01/06/1971]

336

APPENDIX VII ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

                This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st

April 1970.

              Government Decision

                The Rules in this section will apply to part-time teachers also with effect from

7th August 1971.

15.         *The teachers under the Department of Technical Education may be granted
special causal leave upto a maximum  of 10 days either prefixed or suffixed to
the vacation, for attending short-time refresher courses/seminars, in case the
period of the training falls outside the vacation period.  For periods in excess
of 10 days,  regular leave will be granted.  For this purpose the teachers may,
as a special case, be permitted to  combine special casual leave with regular
leave.

                  The  Principals  of  the  Engineering  Colleges,  Polytechnics,  Women’s
Polytechnics  and  the  Institute  of  Printing  Technology,  Shornur  are
authorised to sanction special casual leave under this rule.

              This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 18th

September 1973.

16.         † Disabled State Government employees, shall be eligible for special casual
leave for a maximum period of 15 days at a time (including the time spent in
transit both ways)  to attend Artificial Limb Centre and stay in hospital for
replacement/treatment of their artificial limbs. Special casual leave under this
rule may be granted on more than one occasion in a calendar year, if needed.

16A.     #  All physically handicapped employees eligible to claim conveyance
allowance shall be eligible for special casual leave for a maximum period

*[G O(P) No. 199/1974/Fin., Dated 13/09/1974]

†[G O(P) No. 174/1977/Fin., Dated  04/06/1977]
# [G O(P) No. 800/1985/Fin., Dated 10/12/1985]

337

APPENDIX VII ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

of 15 days in a calendar year for treatment of illness connected with the
physical handicap of the employee concerned in hospital or at residence
on production of medical certificate to that effect from the authorised
Medical Officers attending on them.

17.         *Teaching staff of Government Colleges accompanying students’ teams for
University Youth Festivals organised by the University Union and teaching
staff of schools who accompany the students’ teams for Youth Festivals,
sports  meets,  coaching  camps  conducted  at  State  level  shall  be  granted
special  casual  leave  for  the  days  of  the  events  and  the  minimum  period
required for to and fro journeys subject to the condition that the total period
of suchspecial casual leave shall not exceed 15 days in a calendar year.

18.       †The staff guides, namely teachers in schools and junior lecturers and
lecturers in colleges engaged in the Forest Club activities will be granted
two days special casual leave in a calendar year for attending to seminars,
etc. relating to those activities.

                Effective from 5th June 1985.

19.            #  Employees  who  undergo  **(Omitted)  heart  surgery  or  organ/kidney
transplantation shall be granted special casual leave not exceeding 45 days in
a calendar year, on production of certificate to that effect from an authorised
Medical Officer to cover the actual period required for **(Omitted) heart
surgery or organ/kidney transplantation followed by post  transplantation
recovery. The leave may be allowed to be combined  with the ordinary leave
as defined in rule 77 (i) part I of these Rules or with ordinary casual leave. The
period of leave under this rule shall be exclusive of public holidays that may
intervene and the leave may be availed of on more than one occasion in a
calendar year, if needed.

*[G O(P) No. 218/1978/Fin., Dated  27/02/1978]
†[G O(P) No. 51/1989/Fin., Dated 30/01/1989]
# [Insertion G O(P) No. 508/2012/Fin., Dated 22/09/2012(with effect from 26/02/2011)]
**[Deleted G O(P) No. 581/2014/Fin., Dated 29/12/2014(with effect from 09/09/2013)]

338

APPENDIX VII ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

  Explanation:- For the purpose of this rule, ‘authorised medical officer’ means,-

         (i)  The Medical Officers of Government not below the rank of an

Assistant  Surgeon;  and

            (ii)   Private Medical Pratitioners of modern medicine registered in Part

A of the Register of Modern Medicines.

19.A.     †Employees who undergo chemotherapy or radiation shall be granted special
casual  leave  not  exceeding  six  months  in  a  calendar  year,  subject  to  the
conditions, specified in rule 19.

20.          * Every employee having a physically or mentally challenged child shall
be granted special casual leave for a maximum period of 15 days in a
calendar year on production of a certificate from a medical officer attending
the child, stating that the child is physically, or mentally, challenged, on
each occasion of the leave. Special casual leave under this rule shall be
granted on more than one occasion subject to a maximum period of 15
days in a calendar year, if found necessary. The leave may be combined
with  ordinary  leave  or  casual  leave  and  the  period  of  leave  shall  be
exclusive of public holidays that may intervene. If both the parents are
Government employees, a declaration countersigned by the competent
authority to the effect that the spouse has not availed the leave in that
calendar year shall also be produced.

21.            ** An employee shall be granted special casual leave for the day of voluntary

blood donation, on production of a certificate of blood donation from the

Medical Officer of the institution where blood is donated, provided that the

number  of  days  of  such  Special  Casual  Leave  that  can  be  availed  by  an
employee  shall  not  exceed  2  days  with  effect  from  4th May,  1989  to  19th

*[Insertion G O(P) No. 405/2013/Fin., Dated 27/08/2013 (with effect from 26/02/2011)]

†[Insertion G O(P) No. 581/2014/Fin., Dated 29/12/2014 (with effect from 09/09/2013)]
**[Insertion G O(P) No. 580/2014/Fin., Dated 29/12/2014]

339

APPENDIX VII ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

November, 2012 and 4 days with effect from 20th November, 2012 during a
calendar year.

SECTION III

 COMPENSATION  LEAVE

              Subject to the following conditions, compensation leave at the rate of one

day for each public holiday may be granted to a Government servant who

attends office on public (authorised) holidays under the orders of the head
of office in order to attend to urgent work arising from the absence of another

Government  servant  or  from  circumstances  beyond  the  control  of  the

Government Servant:

                (i)    Such leave should be taken by a Government servant only with the prior

permission of the authority competent to grant him casual leave.

                (ii)   The maximum period of such leave that can be taken by a Government

servant in a calendar year will be **fifteen days.

                         **Effective from 1st June 1989.

                (iii)     No Government servant will be permitted to take such leave after the expiry of
three months from the public holiday (s) on which he attended office and in lieu

of which the leave is granted.

                   (iv)    Such leave will not be accumulated for more than 10 days but such leave

may be combined with casual leave or other authorised holidays provided
that the total period of absence from duty shall # not exceed fifteen days.

                        †Effective from 7th May 1973.

**[G O(P) No. 840/1992/Fin., Dated  04/11/1992]

# [Substitution G O(P) No.61/2007/Fin.,  Dated 17/02/2007]

†[G O(P) No. 548/1977/Fin., Dated  23/12/1977]

340

APPENDIX VII ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

                (v)    Such leave may not be combined with regular leave such as earned

leave, half pay leave, etc.

              (vi)    A Government servant touring on public (authorised) holiday(s) in

connection with performance of his duties is not eligible for such

leave in lieu of the holiday(s) on which he was on tour.

              (vii)   Such leave shall not be admissible to heads of offices.

                         Effective from 3rd July 1970.

  # Note.- The benefit of compensatory off for turn duty on Sundays and other
closed  holidays  will  be  allowed  to  the  security  staff,  only  without

detriment to the normal security duties.

# [G O(P) No. 395/1974/Fin., Dated  29/11/1974]

341

APPENDIX VIII ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

APPENDIX  VIII

RULES  FOR  THE  GRANT  OF  LEAVE  TO  OFFICERS
APPOINTED  FOR  LIMITED  PERIODS

(Referred to in Appendix I and Note I below Rule 63 of Part I)

1.         Where the appointment is for one year or less, earned leave on full pay
calculated at 1/11th of the period spent on duty may be granted subject to
a maximum of 15 days on production of medical certificate.  If earned
leave has been exhausted, leave on medical certificate, on *half pay upto
15 days may be granted subject to the condition that the total period of
the two kinds of leave does not exceed one month in the officer’s term of
service.

            If the officer serves in a vacation department, earned leave will not be
admissible;  but  he  may  be  granted,  if  absolutely  necessary  leave  on
medical certificate on *half pay not exceeding 1/11th of the time spent on
duty, subject to a  maximum of 15 days during the officer’s term of service.

               *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from

1st April 1973.

2.            Where the appointment is for more than one year but not more than five
years, earned leave will be admissible at 1/11th of the period spent on
duty,  subject  to  the  limit  of  15  days  in  a  year.    Such  leave  may  be
accumulated upto a maximum period of two months.  Leave on medical
certificate on † half pay may also be granted in addition to earned leave
subject to a maximum of two months in all during the period of service.  In
addition,  leave  without  allowances  may  be  granted  in  special
circumstances,  when  no  other  leave  is  admissible,  subject  to  a  total
maximum limit of three months.

                     If the officer serves in a vacation department earned leave will not be admissible.

*[G O(P) No. 491/1975/Fin., Dated  24/10/1975]
†[G O(P) No. 825/1980/Fin., Dated  31/10/1980]

342

APPENDIX VIII ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

  Note.-  Maternity leave under Rules 100 and 101 will be admissible to female
officers appointed on contract basis continuing in service beyond one
year provided they would continue in service but for proceeding on
such leave.

  †This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from

26th August 1971.

3.            Where the appointment is for a longer period than five years, but not for
an indefinite period, or an original appointment for five years or less is
extended so as to make the total period of appointment longer than five
years but not for an indefinite period, leave admissible to a permanent
officer under the ordinary rules, may be allowed subject to the condition
that leave on medical certificate on *half pay will be limited to six months
in all.  In the case of extension of the original term of appointment to more
than five years, the officer will be credited with the earned leave that
would have been admissible had the appointment been initially one of
more  than  5  years  diminished  by  the  earned  leave  already  taken  and
leave on medical certificate on *half pay, if any, already taken, will count
against the six months limit prescribed.

4.            In the case of an officer falling under Rules 2 and 3 above, earned leave due
may be granted after the expiry of the period of appointment, only if the leave
has been applied for during the period of appointment and refused owing to
the exigencies of the public service.  An officer whose services are dispensed
with on grounds of ill-health may be permitted to take all the earned leave due
to him before his service is terminated.

5.             The terms “earned leave” and “leave on medical certificate on half pay” used
in these rules have the same meanings as they have in the other rules of
the Kerala Service Rules and the leave salary during leave taken under

†[G O(P) No. 825/1980/Fin., Dated  31/10/1980]
*[G O(P) No. 491/1975/Fin., Dated  24/10/1975]

343

APPENDIX VIII ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

          these rules shall be regulated under Rules 92 and 93 of Part I, Kerala

Service Rules *.

               *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from

1st April 1973.

6.          An officer initially engaged for a limited period becomes subject to the
ordinary leave rules in their entirety, on his being taken into permanent
employment.  In such a case, the officer will be credited with all the leave
that would have been admissible, had his appointment been one for an
indefinite period from the start diminished by the leave already taken.
Leave on medical certificate, if any, already taken will count against the
maximum limit prescribed.

7.         In the case of an officer who has been appointed for a limited period to a
temporary post or to a permanent post in an officiating capacity,  leave will be
granted only on the further condition that his leave vacancy is not filled up
and that the leave or any portion thereof will not go beyond the sanctioned
period of his service.

   Note.- The above rules will not apply to officers who were appointed before
the coming into effect of these rules or to officers in whose case the
terms of their appointment specifically provide for the grant of leave
otherwise than in accordance with these rules.

             Government Decision No. 1

              † Rules in Appendix VIII will apply to provisional recruits in the matter of

leave.

              Government Decision No. 2

                    **The  leave  earned  by  provisional  recruits  during  provisional  service
diminished by the leave, if any, already taken will be carried forward on
regularisation of their provisional appointment without any interruption.

*[G O(P) No. 491/1975/Fin., Dated  24/10/1975]
† [G O(P) No. 103/1961/Fin., Dated  04/03/1961]
**[G O(P) No. 388/1970/Fin.,  Dated 03/06/1970]

344

APPENDIX VIII ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

               **The provisional recruits will be eligible for the leave admissible to regular

employees only from the date of regularisation of appointment.

              Government Decision No. 3

              †An officer on contract appointment will be credited with the leave earned
by him in his previous contract appointment (s) diminished by the leave, if
any, already taken even if the appointments are not in the same post provided
there is no break between the appointments.

              Government Decision No. 4

               # Officers appointed on a fixed monthly honorarium against regular sanctioned
post will be governed by the leave rules in this Appendix.  The benefit of surrender
of earned leave will be allowed to them as in the case of provisional employees.

*8.  (i)        An officer appointed under rule 9(a) (i) of the General Rules of Part II of the Kerala
State and Subordinate Services Rules, 1958 through Employment Exchange for
a period of 180 days shall be eligible for casual leave at the rate of one day for a
month subject to a maximum of six days. Casual leave may be allowed to combine
with Sundays and other authorised holidays provided that the resulting period
of absence from duty shall not exceed four days at a strech.

               (ii)   Contract employees referred to in rule 8, and re-employed pensioners
referred to in rule 63 of Part I of these rules may be granted casual leave
at the rate of one day for a month subject to a maximum of twelve days
in a year. The leave may be allowed to combine with Sundays and other
authorised holidays provided that the resulting period of absence from
duty shall not exceed seven days at a stretch.

                 (iii)    All other conditions in rules relating to casual leave under Appendix VII,

Part I of these rules shall mutatis mutandis apply”.

**[G O(P) No. 322/1993/Fin., Dated 12/05/1993]
†[G O(P) No. 499/1971/Fin., Dated 23/08/1971]
# [G O(P) No. 55/1974/Fin., Dated  07/03/1974]

*[G O(P) No. 333/2014/Fin., Dated 13/08/2014. (with effect from 01/12/2010)]

345

APPENDIX IX ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

APPENDIX   IX

LIST  OF  HILLY  TRACTS

 (Referred to in Note 1 to Rule 44 of Part II)

           A. Class I Tracts

1.         # Of the area detailed below the tracts falling within the taluks of Devicolam,
Udumbanchola, Peermade, Pathanamthitta, Pathanapuram , Nedumangad and
Neyyattinkara will form Class I tracts :-

                  The  portion  lying  to  the  east  of  a  due  north  and  south  line  from  the
northeastern most boundary of the Kunnathunad Taluk  upto Thattakkad
and thence passing eastwards along southern bank of the Periyar river
upto the junction of its northern tributary, the Muthirapuzhai or Munnar
river thence southwards along the western bank of the Periyar river, and
its  tributary,  the  Cheruthoniyar  and  the  Endayar  upto  Mundakkayam
bridge on the Kottayam – Kumili road, thence southwards straight on
the  junction  of  the  Aruthayar  and  the  Pamabayar  and  thence  to  the
junction of the Palathada Aur and Kokkad Aur, thence due south to the
Achenkoil  river  crossing  the  Kallar  and  thence  to  Ramakal  along  the
southern bank of the Achenkoil river.

               *The portion lying to the south of a line starting from Channar ghat peak and
passing along the northern bank of the Shendurni river upto the junction of
the Quilon-Shencottah road and Trvandrum-Schencottah road, thence passing
southward along the eastern side of the Trivandrum-Shencottah road upto
Palode, thence along the eastern side of the road from Palode, to Arianad via
Vidura till it meets the Nedumangad- Shorlacode road and thence passing
southwards along the Nedumangadu-Shorlacode road till it meets the State
Boundary.

               *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from

22nd February 1973

# [G O(P) No. 59/1975/Fin., Dated 13/02/1975]

*[G O(P) No. 366/1975/Fin., Dated  11/08/1975]

346

APPENDIX IX ] KERALA S ERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

2               Chalakudy Division.-  Starting from 19th mile in Tramline at Cherumkayam the

line proceeds northwards to meet the division boundary and thence follows

the  division  boundary  upto  the  State  boundary  and  thence  along  the

Sekkalamudi, thence to Parambikulam, thence along the Parambikulam river

upto Muduvarachal and thence westwards passing Kavali Anapandam and

meet the starting station at Cherumkayam.

              Trichur Division (Nelliampathy Range).-

             North.- The boundary starts from the inter-district boundary of Trichur and

Palghat at Vellamttimalai and proceeds more or less northeast passing the

northern side of Padagirimala and Palayampara Estate and reaches the district

boundary at nearly one mile south of Govindamalai Estate; thence along the

above inter-district boundary towards northeast for about one mile and reaches

nearly half a mile northwest of Oottukuzhi Estate.

            East.-  Thence the boundary proceeds along the inter-district boundary of

Palaghat and Trichur and reaches the junction point of Thekkadi and Vetti

rivers.

                South.-Thence more or less east along the inter-forest division boundary of

Chalakudy and Trichur to the inter-district boundary of Trichur and Palghat

at nearly one mile north of Anjanapara.

             West.-  Thence the boundary proceeds along the inter-district boundary of

Palghat and Trichur and reaches the starting point.

              Palappilly Range.-

           East.- The boundary starts from Ponmudi at which the inter-range boundary

between Palappilly and Paravattany  meets the inter-district boundary of Trichur

and Palaghat, and proceeds along the above inter-district boundary and reaches

a point nearly one mile south of Kurumalamudi.

347

APPENDIX IX ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

           South.- Thence the boundary proceeds more or less southwest along the

inter-forest division boundary between Trichur and Chalakudy for about 5½

miles to reach nearly two miles south of Kumali.

                  West.- Thence the boundary proceeds nearly west to reach the Chiminipuzha

at  nearly  one  mile  west  of  Kallichitra,  thence  along  the  northern  side  of

Chiminipuzha for about ¾ mile downstream; thence along the tributary of

Chiminipuzha to reach the inter-taluk boundary between Mukundapuram and

Trichur at nearly 1 ¾ miles west of Ponmudi.

             North.-  Thence along the above inter-taluk boundary till it reaches Ponmudi,

the starting point.

3.            Attappadi Valley and the Chenat Nair, * and Silent Valley Reserved Forest.

4.             Sungam Range of Nemmara Forest Division.

5.            *[Omitted]

               *Effective from 9th March 1981.

6.         Idukki District.- The area comprising the whole of Idukki Village and the

portions of Velliamatom and Arakulam Villages in Thodupuzha Taluk having

the boundaries specified below :

               North.- Boundaries of Kotahmangalam and Devicolam Taluks.

               East.- Boundaries of Udumbanchola Taluk.

               South.- Boundaries of Peerumedu Taluk.

         West. - The line across Arakulam Village, starting from the tri-junction of

Passupara Village in Peerumedu Taluk and Arakulam and Idukki Village of

*[G O(P) No. 159/1981/Fin., Dated  09/03/1981]

348

APPENDIX IX ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

Thodupuzha Taluk and ending at first Zig point on Thodupuzha-Idukki Road

and the line thence across Velliamattom village to the tri-junction of Idukki,

Velliamattom and Udumbannoor Village of Thodupuzha Taluk from where

the western boundary of Idukki Village goes north-wards to meet the Taluk

boundary of Kothamangalam.

             The item 6 shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 9th

December 1970.

               B. Class II  Tracts

             1.  The portions of the area other than those falling within the taluks of

Devicolam, Peermade, Udumbanchola and Pathanmathitta detailed at

A1 above, will form Class II tracts.

            2.    Chalakudy  Division.-  Starting  from  Cherumkayam  the  boundary

proceeds upto Kothamuzhi, thence along the Kannamkuzhi thodu

upto Chalakudi river, thence along the river the boundary proceeds

up  to  Echipara,  thence  to  Vellikulangara  passing  Konnakuzhi,

Peeliarmuzhi,  Kormala  and  Veeranchira,  thence  the  boundary

proceeds nearly northwards to cross the Vaikathu stream and meet

the division boundary and along the said boundary of Class I tracts

and closes on the starting station.

              Nelliampathy Range.-

              * West.- The boundary starts from the inter-district boundary of Palghat and

Trichur at Vellattimalai and proceeds northwest to reach the village boundary

of Thiruvazhiyad and Kairady Village tri-junction.

                  North.-  Thence  along  the  boundary  of  Thiruvazhiyad  and  Nemmara

touching the main road, thence the boundary proceeds along the road to
Shernally Rubber Estates to the 11th  mile.

*[G O(P) No. 159/1981/Fin., Dated  09/03/1981]

349

APPENDIX IX ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

          *East.- Thence along the above road for about 4 Kilometres to reach the

northern  boundary  of  Class  I  area  at  Pulayampara  described  in  the

Nelliampathy Range under the heading “A. Class I Tracts”.

               South.- Thence the boundary proceeds along the northern boundary of Class I

area in Nelliampathy Range and reaches the starting point.

              Palappilly Range.-

                    North.-  The  boundary  proceeds  from  the  inter-range  boundary  between

Palappilly and Paravattany at nearly half a mile west of Mangattukumban

and  proceeds  east  to  reach  where  the  northern  boundary  of  Class  I  area

described in ‘A’ above starts.

                East.-  Thence along the western boundary of Class I area in Palappilly Range

described in ‘A’ above to reach the inter-forest division boundary of Trichur and

Chalakudy.

                  South.-Thence  along  the  above  inter-division  boundary  to  reach

Muplypuzha near fourteenth mile of Cochin State Forest Tramway.

               West.-  Thence along Muplypuzha downstream for about 5 miles and along

Chiminipuzha for about 3½ miles upstream to reach neraly 1½ miles east of

Anaipadam,  and  thence  to  meet  the  inter-range  boundary  at  the  starting

point.

              Paravattany Range.-

               North.-  The boundary starts from the inter-taluk boundary of Talappilly and

Trichur at 2 ¼ miles east south-east to Melaka and proceeds along the above

inter-taluk  boundary  to  reach  the  inter-district  boundary  of  Palghat  and

Trichur.

*[G O(P) No. 605/1981/Fin., Dated 17/09/1981]

350

APPENDIX IX ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

                    East.-  Thence  along  the  above  inter-district  boundary  the  boundary
proceeds  to  Ponmudi  where  the  inter-taluk  boundary  between
Mukundapuram and Trichur meets the inter-district boundary.

              South.- Thence the boundary proceeds along the northern boundary of Class I

and Class  II areas described above in Palappily Range.

            West.-  Thence the boundary proceeds northwest to reach ¾ mile north to
Vengapara, thence to northwest to reach Peechi Dam, thence proceeds along
the Peechi Right Bank Canal to reach the crossing point at Trichur-Vaniampara
road and thence proceeds northwest to meet the inter-taluk boundary at the
starting point.

             *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect

from 1st day of September 1975.

              Machad Range.-

           West.- The boundary starts from the crossing point of Trichur-Ambalappadu
road at the inter-range boundary of Machad Range and Paravattany Range and
proceeds  along  the  sixth  mile.  Thence  more  or  less  northeast  to  reach
Wadakkancherry-Vazhani road near Vazhani.

           North.-Thence along the above road and succeeding cart-tract for about
one mile; thence crossing Vazhani lake and along the thodu starting from
nearby place of Munipara and falls in Vazhani lake; reaches the inter-range
boundary at nearly half a mile west of Munipara.

             East.- Thence the boundary proceeds southwest for about 1¾ miles along
the inter-range boundary of Machad Range and Paravattany Range.

                South.- Thence the boundary proceeds along the above inter-range boundary

and reaches the starting point.

3.

       The Wayanad Taluk and the Vaithiri Ghat section.

*[G O(P) No. 143/1980/Fin., Dated 19/02/1980]

351

APPENDIX XII ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

APPENDIX   XII

RULES  FOR  THE  GRANT  OF  LEAVE  TO  RADIATION
WORKERS  IN  THE  STATE  MEDICAL  SERVICE

(Referred to in Rule 110 A of Part I)

               Rules for the grant of leave to Radiation Workers in the State Medical Service.

                   1.   For the purpose of these Rules:

 (i)   “Radiation worker” means a worker liable to exposure to
ionising radiation in the course of his official work which
shall include a person working inside the X-ray and Radium
Departments  like  Radiologist,  Radiographer,  Technician
and Nursing staff of Radiology Department but does not
include stretcher bearers, attenders, etc., of the Radiology
Department who are not exposed to radiation while a patient
is being X-rayed or treated.

 (ii)    “A year” means a year of duty.

                   2.   *Every radiation worker shall be granted thirty days special casual
leave in one spell, every year to recoup his health even when his
health is apparently good.

                      This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect

from 1st April 1995.

                   3.   These Rules shall apply to all radiation workers (permanent or temporary
employees) in the State Medical Service but not to purely provisional
hands.

                        The above Rule shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from

29th March 1965.

*[G O(P) No. 992/1997/Fin., Dated 05/11/1997]

352

APPENDIX XII A ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

APPENDIX  XII A

RULES  FOR  THE  GRANT  OF  LEAVE  WITHOUT  ALLOWANCES  FOR

TAKING  UP  EMPLOYMENT  ABROAD  OR  WITHIN  INDIA

(Referred to in Exception 2 to Rule 88 and Rule 110-B of Part I)

                * The following rules shall regulate the grant of leave without allowances to
officers for taking up employment abroad or within India.  These rules shall
not  apply  in  cases  of  employment  in  the  service  of  any  public  sector
undertaking, aided schools and private colleges †or self financing colleges
within  the  state  or  any  body  incorporated  or  not,  which  is  wholly  or
substantially owned, controlled or aided by any State Government or the
Government of India.

1.          Government will be very selective in granting leave without allowances to
employees belonging to professional categories like highly qualified doctors,
engineers, scientists etc.,  for taking up employment abroad or within India.
In scarce categories like Veterinary Surgeons, Livestock Assistants and any
other  category  where  there  is  shortage  of  personnel,  officers  will  not  be
allowed  to  take  up  such  employment  unless  they  resign  their  jobs  under
Government before hand.

2.        No officer going for employment under these rules will be treated as on
deputation.  An officer taking up employment abroad or within India on his
own accord will have to go on leave without allowances to avail himself of
the facility.

3.               No  other  kind  of  leave  will  be  sanctioned  in  combination  with  or  in
continuation  of  the  leave  under  these  rules,    **except  leave  under
Appendix XII C.

†[Insertion G O(P) No. 245/2012/Fin., Dated 27/04/2012. (with effect from 07/06/2010)]

**[G O(P) No. 1002/1997/Fin., Dated  06/11/1997]

353

APPENDIX XII A ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

4.        *Permanent officers and non-permanent officers in the regular service of
Government who have completed probation in the grade in which they are
working, including entry grade, may be granted leave without allowances
under these rules.  In such cases, for and during the currency of, the period
of leave, the officers shall lose all service benefits such as the earning of
leave including half pay leave, pension, gratuity, increment, etc., and also
promotion chances as may arise with reference to their seniority in the posts
from which they proceeded on leave. They shall also lose seniority in the
higher grade/grades with reference to their juniors who might get promoted
to such grade/grades before they rejoin duty.

  † Note .-  Omitted

4A            # Permanent and non-permanent officers in the regular service of Government
who have completed probation in their entry grade, buy have not completed
probation  in  the  grade  in  which  they  are  working  may  be  granted    leave
without allowances subject to the condition that they will lose service benefits
such as earning of leave including half pay leave, pension, gratuity, increment
etc., and also promotion chances that may arise with reference to their seniority
in that grade for and during the currency of the leave period and will have to
rejoin as the junior most  in that grade and start afresh. They shall also lose
seniority in the higher grade/ grades with respect to their juniors who might
get promoted to such grade/ grades before they rejoin duty. However, their
prior service including that in the grade will count for accrual of Half Pay
Leave, Earned Leave; time bound grade promotion, increment and pension.

**5          Non-permanent  officers  in  the  regular  service  who  have  not  completed
probation  in  the  entry  cadre  shall  be  granted  Leave Without Allowances
subject to the condition that such officers will have to start their probation

[* Substitution, # Insertion G O(P) No.94/2010/Fin., Dated 01/03/2010
    (with effect from 01/03/2010) ]

† Omitted, ** Insertion [G O(P) No. 359/2015/Fin., Dated 13/08/2015
    (with effect from 23/08/2012)]

354

APPENDIX XII A ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

afresh  and  complete  their  probation  on  return  from  Leave  Without
Allowances. Such officers will forfeit the service benefits that have accrued
to them prior to their proceeding on Leave Without Allowances and they
will be deemed as new entrants to Government service on return from Leave
Without Allowances. Their right to rejoin Government service in the same
entry cadre is protected, as if they were new entrants. On further verification
by the Kerala Public Service Commission/ the Police Department, if it is
found that the officer is ineligible for appointment, the appointment shall be
treated as null and void and the Leave Without Allowances shall be treated
as cancelled from the date of sanction of leave.

@6.         The maximum period of leave that may be sanctioned to an officer during his
entire service shall be limited to twenty years **and such leave shall not
extend  beyond  twelve  months  before  the  date  of  superannuation.  If  the
officer who has availed himself of the leave without allowances for a total
period  of  20  years,  whether  continuously  or  in  broken  periods  does  not
return to duty immediately on the expiry of the leave, his service shall be
terminated  after  following  the  procedure  in  Kerala  Civil  Services
(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1960. This condition shall be
incorporated in every order sanctioning such leave.

               @This shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 5th February, 1996.

               **This shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 2nd May 2002.

7.           Those who are under bonded obligation to serve Government for a prescribed
period will not be granted leave under these rules till the period covered by the
bond is over, unless they settle the bonded obligations before the grant of leave.
The  amount  remitted  on  that  account  will  not  be  refunded  under  any
circumstances.  Similarly, officers against whom disciplinary action or vigilance
enquiry is pending will not be eligible for leave under these rules.

*[Deleted G O(P) No. 636/2010/Fin., Dated 25/11/10 (with effect from 09/04/2008)]
@ [Substitution  G O(P) No. 637/2002/Fin., Dated 19/10/2002]
**[G O(P) No. 215/2005/Fin., Dated  11/05/2005]

355

APPENDIX XII A ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

8.           Those who had availed themselves of any loan such as house  building
advance, conveyance advance etc., shall either clear the dues or execute
a bond as required under G.O.(P) 1028/79/Fin.,dated 23rd November  1979
in the form appended thereto, before the grant of leave. *Those who are
subscribers of Group Insurance Scheme shall be permitted to remit the
arrear subscription for the defaulted period, with quarterly compound
interest at the rate specified by Government for the savings fund, in not
more than three instalments, provided they have not attained the age of
50 years, on rejoining duty, after obtaining Government sanction.  Such
members  shall  lose  their  entitlement  under  the  insurance  fund  in  the
event of death during the period of leave under this rule.  Those who
have attained the age of 50 years on the date of rejoining duty on expiry
of Leave Without Allowances shall cease to be a subscriber of the scheme
and shall be entitled for accrued balance under savings fund only at the
time of  retirement.

9.          Those officers who absent themselves unauthorisedly without getting the
leave  sanctioned  under  these  rules  shall  be  proceeded  against  and  their
service terminated after following the procedure laid down in the Kerala Civil
Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules 1960.  Requests for re-
entertainment  in  Government  Service  in  such  cases  as  well  as  in  cases
covered by Rule 6 above,  will be summarily rejected.

10.          These  rules shall apply to all cases of grant of leave without allowances on
or after the  16th December, 1983 whether in extension of the leave already
granted  or  otherwise  and  such  leave  granted  before  that  date  shall  be
reckoned for applying the 20** years limit under Rule 6 above.

              **They shall be  deemed to have come into force on 5th February 1996.

*[Substitution G O(P) No. 217/2012/Fin., Dated 11/04/2012 (with effect from 02/08/2007)]

**[G O(P) No. 637/2002/Fin., Dated 19/10/2002]

356

APPENDIX XII A ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

11.        No relaxation of any of the above rules will be allowed.

               # This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from

16th December 1983.

 † Note.- Notwithstanding anything contained in these Rules those who have
proceeded on leave for taking up employment abroad *or within the

country  before  the  commencement  of  these  Rules,  after  obtaining

permission  of  Government  will  continue  to  be  governed  by  the

conditions laid down in G.O.(P) 274/70/Fin., dated 29-4-1970 for the

leave granted to them even if it extends beyond 16-12-1983.

  † Effective  from 16th December 1983.

# [G O(P) No. 953/1986/Fin., Dated  27/12/1986]

*[G O(P) No. 150/1996/Fin., Dated  30/01/1996]

†[G O(P) No. 1078/1992/Fin., Dated 16/12/1992]

357

APPENDIX XII B ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

APPENDIX  XII B

RULES  FOR  THE  GRANT  OF   LEAVE  WITHOUT  ALLOWANCES  FOR
THOSE  INELIGIBLE  FOR  LEAVE  FOR  STUDY  PURPOSE
UNDER  RULE  88  OR  RULE  91,  PART  I,
KERALA  SERVICE  RULES

(Referred to in Exception No. 2 to Rule 88 and in Rule 110 – C
under Section XI-C of Chapter IX, Part I.)

           * The following Rules shall regulate the grant of leave for study purpose in the
case of Officers who are not eligible for leave for more than three months under
Rule 88 due to the condition of 3 years of continuous service or under Rule 91
due  to  the  condition  in  Note  2  thereunder.    In  such  cases  Leave Without
Allowances will be granted for the purpose of study to cover the entire period of
the course concerned subject to the following conditions :-

                  (i)    In the case of officers who have completed probation in the entry grade,
during the currency of the period of leave, they shall  lose all service
benefits such as earning of all kinds of Leave, Pension, Gratuity, Increment
etc., and also promotion benefits which may arise with reference to their
seniority in the posts from which they proceeded on leave. They shall also
lose seniority in the higher grade/grades with reference to their juniors
who might get promoted to  such grade/grades before they rejoin duty.
†Officers who have completed probation in their entry grade, but have not
completed  probation  in  the  grade  to  which  they  have  been  promoted
subsequently  may  be  granted  leave  without  allowances  subject  to  the
condition  that  they  will  lose  service  benefits  such  as  earning  of  leave
including Half  Pay Leave, Pension, Gratuity, Increment and also promotion
chances that may arise with respect to their seniority in that grade for and
during the currency of the leave period and will have to join as junior most
in that grade and start afresh. They shall also lose seniority in the higher

*[G O(P) No. 654/1995/Fin., Dated 10/10/1995]
† [Inserted G O(P) No. 94/2010/Fin., Dated 01/03/2010 (with effect from 01/03/2010)]

358

APPENDIX XII B ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

grade/grades with respect to their juniors who might get promoted to
such grade/ grades before they rejoin duty. However, their prior service
including that in the grade will count for accrual of Half Pay Leave,
Earned Leave, time bound grade promotion, increment and pension.

              (ii)   In the case of  those who have not completed probation in the entry
grade,  they  shall.  besides  losing  all  the  service  benefits  during  the
currency of the period of leave, forfeit the service benefits that had
accrued to them prior to their proceeding on leave. They shall be deemed
as new entrants to Government Service on return from leave.  They
shall have to start afresh and complete their probation on return from
leave. Only their right to rejoin Government Service in the same entry
grade is protected as if they were new entrants;

               (iii)   Those who are under bonded obligation to serve Government for a
prescribed period will not be granted leave under these rules till the
period covered by the bond is over, unless they settle the bonded
obligation before the grant of leave. The amount remitted on that
account  will  not  be  refunded  under  any  circumstances.  Officers
against whom disciplinary action or vigilance enquiry is pending
will not be eligible for leave under these Rules;

              (iv)    The maximum period of leave that can be granted will be five years

during the entire period of service;

                 (v)    The leave will not be allowed to be combined with any other kind of leave

or vacation;

               (vi)    In the case of officers who do not rejoin duty on the expiry of leave, they
shall be removed from service after following the procedure laid down in
the Kerala Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal)  Rules, 1960.

                        *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect

from 18th September 1984.

*[G O(P) No. 654/1995/Fin., Dated 10/10/1995]

359

APPENDIX XII C ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  & II

APPENDIX XII  C

RULES  FOR  THE  GRANT  OF  LEAVE  WITHOUT  ALLOWANCES

FOR  JOINING  SPOUSE

(Referred to in Exception 2 to Rule 88 and in Rule 110-D, Part I)

               * The following rules shall regulate the grant of leave without allowances for

the purpose of joining spouse.

                   1.   Only leave without allowances shall be granted for the purpose.

   Note.- Officers, who seek leave for short periods, not exceeding three months
for  the  purpose  of  joining  spouse,  may  be  granted  ordinary  leave
subject to eligibility.  However, when officers who avail of such leave
upto three months, seek extension in continuation of the leave for the
same  purpose,  the  ordinary  leave  already  granted  shall  be
retrospectively commuted into leave without allowances under these
rules.

                 2.   Officers shall not accept any employment during the currency of the

period of leave, without prior sanction of the Government.

                      3.    No other kind of leave except leave under Appendix XIIA shall be granted

in combination with or in continuation of the leave under  these rules.

                    4.   @ Permanent officers and non-permanent officers in the regular service
of Government who have completed  probation in the grade in which
they are working, including entry cadre, may be granted leave without
allowances under these rules. In such cases, for, and during the currency
of the period of leave, the officers shall  lose all service  benefits including
earning of leave, increment, gratuity, pension etc., and also promotion
chances as may arise with reference to their seniority in the posts from

@ [Substitution G O(P) No. 94/2010/Fin., Dated 01/03/2010 (with effect from 01/03/2010)]

360

APPENDIX XII C ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

which they proceed on leave.  They shall also lose seniority in the
higher grade (s) with reference to their juniors who might get promoted
to such grade (s) before they rejoin duty.

               *Note.- Omitted

             4A    **Permanent and non-permanent officers in the regular service of
Government who have completed probation in their entry grade,
but have not completed probation in the grade in which they are
working may be granted  leave without allowances subject to the
condition  that  they  will  lose  service  benefits  such  as  earning  of
leave including Half Pay Leave, pension, gratuity, increment etc.,
and also promotion chances that may arise with reference to their
seniority  in  that  grade  for  and  during  the  currency  of  the  leave
period and will have to rejoin as the junior most in that grade and
start  afresh.    They  shall  also  lose  seniority  in  the  higher  grade/
grades  with  respect  to  their  juniors  who  might  get  promoted  to
such  grade/grades  before  they  rejoin  duty.    However,  their  prior
service including that in the grade will count for accrual of Half Pay
Leave, Earned Leave; time bound grade promotion, increment and
pension.

            †5.     Non-permanent officers in the regular service who have not completed
probation in the entry cadre shall be granted Leave Without Allowances
subject  to  the  condition  that  such  officers  will  have  to  start  their
probation afresh and complete their probation on return from Leave
Without Allowances. Such officers will forfeit the service benefits that
have  accrued  to  them  prior  to  their  proceeding  on  Leave  Without
Allowances and they shall be deemed as new entrants to Government
service on return from Leave Without Allowances. Their right to rejoin

* Omitted, † Insertion [G O(P) No. 359/2015/Fin., Dated  13/08/2015
   (with effect from 23/08/2012)]
†[Inserted G O(P) No. 94/2010/Fin., Dated  01/03/2010 (with effect from 01.03.2010)]

361

APPENDIX XII C ]

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

Government service in the same entry cadre is protected as if they
were  new  entrants.  On  further  verification  by  the  Kerala  Public
Service Commission/ the Police Department, if it is found that the
officer is ineligible for appointment, the appointment shall be treated
as null and void and the Leave Without Allowances shall be treated
as cancelled from the date of sanction of leave.

                *6.     The maximum period of leave that may be sanctioned to officers under
these rules, including the leave sanctioned under Appendix XIIA, if
any, during their entire service shall be limited to twenty years **and
such leave shall not extend beyond twelve months before their date of
superannuation.  If the officers who have availed of the Leave Without
Allowances for a total period of twenty  years, whether continuously
or in broken periods, do not return to duty immediately on the expiry of
the leave, their service shall be terminated after following the procedure
laid down in Kerala Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal)
Rules, 1960.

                         *This shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 9th May, 1997

                         **This shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 2nd May, 2002.

                  7.     Those who are under bonded obligation to serve the Government for a
prescribed period, shall not be granted leave under these rules till the
period  covered  by  the  bond  is  over  or  till  the  bonded  obligation  is
settled.

                  8.    Those who have any outstanding liability to the Government, such as
House  Building Advance,  Conveyance Advance  etc.,  shall  not  be
granted  leave  under  these  rules  unless  they  clear  the  outstanding
liability in toto or execute a bond as prescribed by the Government.

*[Substitution G O(P) No. 636/2002/Fin., Dated 19/10/2002]

**[G O(P) No.215/2005/Fin.,  Dated 11/05/2005]

362

APPENDIX XII C ] KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

†Those  who  are  subscribers  of  Group  Insurance  Scheme  shall  be
permitted to remit the arrear subscription for the defaulted period, with
quarterly compound interest at the rate specified by Government for
the savings fund, in not more than three instalments, provided they

have not attained the age of 50 years, on rejoining duty, after obtaining

Government sanction.  Such members shall lose their entitlement under

the insurance fund in the event of death during the period of leave

under this rule.  Those who have attained the age of 50 years on the

date of joining duty on expiry of Leave Without Allowances shall cease
to be a subscriber of the scheme and shall be entitled for the accrued

balance under savings fund only at the time of retirement.

                  9.      Officers against whom disciplinary action or vigilance enquiry is pending

shall not be eligible for leave under these rules.

                10.    Those officers who absent themselves unauthorisedly without getting

the leave sanctioned under these rules shall be proceeded against and

their service shall be terminated after following the procedure laid down

in the Kerala Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules,

1960.

                        *This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect

from 12th April 1984.

†[Substitution G O(P) No.217/2012/Fin., Dated 11/04/2012 (with effect from 02/08/2007)]

*[G O(P) No. 1002/1997/Fin., Dated  06/11/1997]

363

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

LIST  OF  FORMS

1.            Service Book (Rule 141 – Part III)

2.               Application for Pension/Gratuity, Death-cum-  retirement Gratuity and Family

Pension (Rules 112, 115, 117 and 90 of Part III)

3.            Form for sending Pension Papers (Rule 115, Part III)

4.            4A to 4D – Forms of Nomination for Death-cum-Retirement Gratuity (Rules

76A, Part III)

5.            Form of Nomination for Non-Contributory Family Pension (Rule 86, Part III)

5A          Details of Family for Contributory Family Pension (Rule 90 Part III)

6.            Application for Family Pension/Contributory Family Pension 1964/Death-

cum-Retirement Gratuity (Rules 118 and 90 of Part III)

6-A.       Form  of Intimation (Rule 118, Part III)

7.            Leave Account (Rule 112-Part I)

8.            Indemnity Bond (Rule 139, Part III)

8-A.       Indemnity Bond to be executed by the guardian of  a minor (Note 2, clause 3,

Rule 118, Part III)

9.            Deleted

10.          Deleted

11.          Formal Application for Pension (Rule 110, Part III)

12.           Bond for officiating or temporary Government servants granted leave (Rule

91—Part I)

13.          Application for leave (Rule 113—Part I)

14.          Overtime Register (Rule 7—Appendix IV A)
15.           †Service and Payroll Administrative Repository for Kerala (SPARK) (Rule 13A-

Part 1)

16.          *Nomination for Payment of Arrears of Pension (Rule 138, Part III)

17.          *Notice of Modification of Nomination (Rule 138, Part III)

18.          *Option for Fixation of Pay

19.          *Register for Casual Leave (Rule 4, Appendix VII).

†[G O(P) No. 413/2009/Fin., Dated  25/09/2009 (with effect from 24/04/2007)]
*[G O(P) No. 465/2012/Fin., Dated  17/08/2012 (with effect from 17/08/2012)]

364

FORMS

FORM  No.  7

LEAVE  ACCOUNT

(Rule 112 of Part I)

Part I

Earned  Leave

 Duty

Period
in days

From To

Leave
earned
1/22 or
1/11

Leave at
credit
(Columns
3 + 7)

Leave taken

Period
(days)

From To

Balance
on return
from
leave
(Columns
4 - 6)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

s
k
r
a
m
e
R

8

Part II

Leave  on  half  pay

Duty

Leave
earned

Leave
at
credit

Leave taken

r
a
e
y

s 20 days
for every
completed
year

Columns
3+13

Half pay
leave

Commuted
leave

Days Days

Dates

m
o
r
F

o
T

3

4

5

s
y
a
d
n
i
d
o
i
r
e
P
6

Dates

m
o
r
F

o
T

7

s
y
a
d
n
i
d
o
i
r
e
P
8

365

Dates

m
o
r
F

o
T

1

d
e
t
e
l
p
m
o
c

f
o

.
o
N

2

n
e
k
a
t

e
u
d
t
o
n

e
v
a
e
l

f
o
d
o
i
r
e
P

)
9
+
6
s
n
m
u
l
o
C

(

l
a
t
o
T

)
0
1
-
4
n
m
u
l
o
c
(
e
c
n
a
l
a
B

e
c
n
a
l
a
B

l
a
n
i
F

10 11 12

13

e
v
a
e
l

s
y
a
p

f
l
a
h

n
o

f
o
s
m
r
e
t
n
i
d
o
i
r
e
P
9

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

FORM  No.  12

BOND  FOR  OFFICIATING  OR  TEMPORARY  GOVERNMENT

SERVANTS  GRANTED  LEAVE  UNDER  RULE  91,  PART I,

K.S.R.  FOR  HIGHER  STUDIES

                  KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS  that we Shri……………………..
(H.E. name and address) at present employed at …………………. in the  office
of  ……..  ……………….  (hereinafter  called  “the  Bounden”)  and
Shri…………………………….  (H.E.  name  and  address)  and  Shri.
…………………….. (H.E. name and address) ……… ………………………..
(hereinafter called “the sureties”) do hereby bind ourselves, and each of us,
our heirs, executors,  administrators and assigns jointly and severally to pay
to the Governor of Kerala (hereinafter called “the Government”) on demand
the sum of  ````` 1,000 (Rupees one thousand only) together with interest at
……….. per cent per annum or if the payment is made in a country other than
India,  the  equivalent  of  the  said  amount  in  the  currency  of  that  country
converted at the official rate of exchange between that country and India
and with cost, if any, thereon.

             Signed on this the ……………………….. day of …………………… one

thousand nine hundred and ………………….

                          Signed by Shri. …………………………

                (The Bounden)

               In the presence of witnesses:

                            (1)

                            (2)

                                            Signed by Shri ………………………….

                                            Signed by Shri ………………………….

                                                     (The Sureties)

366

FORMS

               In the presence of witnesses:

                            (1)

                            (2)

          WHEREAS  the Government have granted to the Bounden regular leave,

followed by leave without allowances, for a period ………………. months

………….. days with effect from ……………… in order to enable the Bounden

to study at ….. on condition that on the expiry of the leave, the Bounden

shall serve the Government in such capacity as the Government may require

in the……………………..… Department of the Government or in any other

Department of the Government  as the Government may require, for a period

of five years and also subject to the terms and conditions hereinafter appearing

and the Bounden and the sureties have agreed to the same;

               Now the condition of the above written obligation is that in the event of the

Bounden failing to serve in such capacity as the Government may direct for

a minimum period of five years if so required by the Government , the Bounden

and  the  sureties  shall  forthwith  pay  to  the  Government  the  said  sum  of

````` 1,000 together with interest at ……. percent per annum and costs and

upon payment of such sums the above written obligation shall be void and

of no effect, otherwise this shall be and remain in full force and effect;

               Provided further that the Bounden and the sureties hereby agree that all

sums found due to Government under or by virtue of this bond shall be

recoverable jointly and severally from the Bounden and the sureties and

their  properties  movable  and  immovable  under  the  provisions  of  the

Revenue Recovery Act for the time being in force as though such sums

are arrears of land revenue or in such other manner as the Government

may deem fit.

367

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

              The liability of the sureties under this bond is co-extensive with that of the

Bounden and shall not be affected by the Government giving time or any

other indulgence to the Bounden.

              The stamp duty on this bond shall be borne and paid by the Government.

                         Signed by Shri ………………

                                      (The Bounden)

                         In the presence of witnesses:

                         (1)

                         (2)

                         Signed by Shri……………………

                         Signed by Shri …………………...

                                      (The Sureties)

                         In the presence of witnesses:

                         (1)

                         (2)

368

FORMS

*FORM  NO.  13

APPLICATION  FOR  LEAVE

(See Rule 113, Part I)

  Note.-  Items 1 to 14 must be filled in by all applicants whether gazetted or

non-gazetted.

1.            Name of applicant                         :

2.            Date of birth                                   :

3.            Post held                                         :

4.            Department, Office and Section  :

5.            Pay and scale of pay                     :

6.            Date of entry in  service               :

7.            Date of commencement of continuous service   :

8.            Address during leave                   :

9.           House Rent Allowance, Conveyance Allowance or other compensatory

allowance drawn in the present post  :

10.         Nature and period of leave applied for and date from which the same is

required                                       :

11.          Holidays, if any, proposed to be prefixed/suffixed to the said leave  :

12.          Purpose for  which leave is applied for  :

13.          Date of return from last leave and the nature and period of that leave   :

*[Substitution  G O(P) No. 535/2003/Fin., Dated 14/10/2003  with effect from  03/11/1997]

369

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

14.            I undertake to refund the leave salary drawn during ‘leave not due’ which

would not have been admissible had rule 85, Part I Kerala Service Rules

not been applied in the event of my voluntary retirement or resignation

from  service  at  any  time  until  I  earn  half  pay  leave  not  less  than  the

amount of leave not due availed of by me.

               Place

Signature  of  applicant

(with  date)

15.          Remarks or recommendation of the Controlling Officer.

Signature  (with  date)

Designation

370

FORMS

 *CERTIFICATE  REGARDING  ADMISSIBILITY  OF  LEAVE

[By Accountant General (A&E) in the case of Gazetted Officers]

16.         “Certified that ……………………………………………………... (nature of

leave)  for  ………………………………….  from  ………………..  to

…………………………… is admissible under rule …………………….. of

the Kerala Service Rules”.

Signature  (with  date)

                                                                                                                           Designation

               †Order of the Sanctioning Authority :

Signature(with  date)

Designation

            † If the applicant is drawing any compensatory allowance the sanctioning
authority should state whether on the expiry of leave he is likely to return to

the same post or to another post carrying a similar allowance.

               †This shall come into force from 3rd November 1997.

*[Substitution G O(P) No. 535/2003/Fin., Dated 14/10/2003  with effect from 03/11/1997]

371

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

FORM  No.  14

OVERTIME  REGISTER

(See Rule 7, APPENDIX IV A)

k
r
o
w
e
m

i
t
r
e
v
o
m
r
o
f
r
e
p
o
t

e
h
t

f
o
n
o
i
t
a
n
g
i
s
e
d
d
n
a
e
m
a
N

d
e
r
i
u
q
e
r

t
n
a
v
r
e
s
t
n
e
m
n
r
e
v
o
G

2

s
t
n
e
m
u
l
o
m
E

3

r
e
b
m
u
N

l
a
i
r
e
S

1

k
r
o
w
e
m

i
t
r
e
v
o
f
o
s
r
u
o
H

e
h
t

y
b

d
e
s
i
r
o
h
t
u
a

y
t
i
r
o
h
t
u
a

t
n
e
t
e
p
m
o
c

4

e
m

i
t
r
e
v
o
f
o
s
r
u
o
H

t
n
a
v
r
e
s

t
n
e
m
n
r
e
v
o
G

e
h
t
y
b
d
e
m
r
o
f
r
e
p
k
r
o
w

5

k
r
o
w

f
o
e
r
u
t
a
N

g
n
i
r
u
d
d
e
m
r
o
f
r
e
p

s
r
u
o
h
e
m

i
t
r
e
v
o

6

Why the work could not
be performed during the
prescribed hours of work

Amount of overtime
allowance paid

Initials of the competent
authority

7

8

9

372

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FORMS

*FORM  No.  15

SERVICE  AND  PAYROLL  ADMINISTRATIVE  REPOSITORY
FOR  KERALA
(See Rule 13 A Part-I)

              Instruction: This form is required to be duly filled up and submitted by the
employees while reporting for duty on fresh appointment. The Officer before
whom the employee reports for duty and the appointing authority are required
to countersign the duly filled up form submitted by the employee. After getting
the form countersigned by the appointing authority, the Subject Assistant
will feed the data into Service and Payroll Administrative Repository for Kerala
and obtain Permanent Employee Number from the system and write it down in
the box provided below for the purpose.

Affix a
recently taken
passport  size
photo

                Specimen Signature             Specimen Signature

                Signature shall not touch the lines

                PART A (for Office use)

Employee Code

Department

Office

                PART B: PERSONAL DETAILS
                (To be filled by the employee)

Name
(In  Capital  Letters  and
Initials after the Name)

   Date of Birth

Name of father
Name of mother
Nationality

Sex

State

 *[G O(P) No. 413/2009/Fin., Dated 25/09/2009 (with effect from 24/04/2007)]

373

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

Caste

Category
General/SC/ST/OBC/OEC
Whether ex-servicemen?
(Yes or No)

Voter Identity Card Number

Identification marks of
the employee

1.
2.

Height

Spouse’s Name

Spouse’s Religion

Whether inter religion/caste
marriage?(Yes/No)

Spouse  employed  in
(specify organization)

Religion

Whether  Physically
handicapped (Yes or No)

PAN Number

Ration Card Number

Martial 
status
unmarried/married/
divorced

Spouse’s caste

Whether  spouse  is
employed

                PART C: CONTACT DETAILS

Present  Address

Permanent  Address

House  No.  and
Name
Street Name

Place

Pin

State

District

Taluk

Village

Phone No.

Home Town

Mobile No.

House  No.  and
Name
Street Name

Place

Pin
State

District

Taluk

Village

Phone No.

Home Town

E-mail address

374

              PART D. RECRUITMENT DETAILS

FORMS

Source (PSC or other
agencies)

Method  (Direct/By

transfer)

Advice Memo No.

Whether District
recruitment? (Y/N)

Type (General or Special
recruitment)

Scale of Pay

Advice Memo date

If District recruitment,
Specify the District

Serial No. in the advice

memo

Entry category (State service/
State subordinate service)

Appointment  Order  No.

Appointment  Order  Date

               PART E: IF ALREADY WORKING IN GOVERNMENT, GIVE DETAILS

Department

Designation

Relieving Order No.

Relieving Order Date

Office last worked

Earlier Recruiting Agency

Earlier Advice Memo No.

Earlier Advice Memo Date

Earlier  Appointment
Order No.

Earlier Appointment
Order Date

             PART F: EDUCATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS

Course Title

Subject

University/Board

Institution
studied

Class/
Percentage

Reg.No.
and Year

375

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

               PART G: DECLARATION

Declaration

               The information furnished by me in this joining report is correct to the best

of my knowledge and is based on valid documents. I also hereby produce

the original documents, in respect of all the information given before the

reporting officer for verification. I am also aware of the fact that penal action

would be taken against me if any of the information provided by me is found

fraudulent.

               Station :

               Date :

            Name:

     Signature:

               PART H: VERIFICATION (For office use)

               Verified the original documents and found eligible for admission to duty.

                        Name and dated signature of the

                           Reporting Officer

                 Admitted to duty, Employee details may be furnished into SPARK and PEN

obtained.

                                                                        Name and dated signature of the

Appointing Authority.

376

FORMS

*FORM  NO.  18

OPTION  FOR  FIXATION  OF  PAY

(Rule 28A Part I)

(a)     Consequent upon my promotion as ........................................................... with

effect from........................................FN/AN,  I hereby opt the fixation of pay under

rule 28A, in the higher scale of pay of the promoted post, with effect from the

date of promotion, without any review consequent on accural of increment in
the lower scale.

(b)     Consequent upon my promotion as ............................................................ with

effect from FN/AN, I hereby opt the initial fixation of my pay at the stage in the

time scale of pay of the promoted post next above my pay in the scale of pay of

the lower post on the date of promotion, and thereafter under rule 28A in the

higher scale of pay of the promoted post based on the pay in the lower post

with effect from ............................ i.e., from the date of accural of next increment

in the scale of pay of the lower post.

Place :

Date :

Signature

Name

Designation

* [Inserted G O(P) No. 465/2012/Fin., Dated 17/08/2012 (with effect from 17/08/2012)]

377

KERALA  SERVICE  RULES  PART  I  &  II

*  FORM  NO.  19

REGISTER  OF  CASUAL  LEAVE

( Rule 4, Appendix VII )

Register for Casual Leave for the Year...........................

Name................................                             Desigantion........................

Date of
application

Period of
Casual
Leave
applied for

Date of

Commencement Termination

Total period
of Casual
Leave
availed of

Initials of
Sanctioning
Authority

s
k
r
a
m
e
R

* [Inserted G O(P) No. 465/2012/Fin., Dated 17/08/2012 (with effect from 17/08/2012)]

378

