71.

72.

73.

Vaniar

Vakkaliga

Veerasaivas (Yogis, Yogeeswara, Poopandaram/Maalapandaram , Jangam  and
Pandaram)

74.

Veluthedathu Nair (Veluthedan and Vannathan)

75.

Vilakkithala Nair (Vilakkithalavan)

76.

Yadavas (Kolaya, Ayar, Mayar,Maniyani and Iruman)

77.

Mooppar or Kallan Mooppan or Kallan Mooppar

78.

Mahendra-Medara

2.

In Malabar District:

1. * *  * *  *  *  * * 

2. Boyan

3. Ganjam Reddis

4. Vishavan

3.

Throughout the State except Malabar District :

1. Kammara

 2   * *  * *  *  *  *  * 

3. Malayekandi

4. Reddiars

4.

Throughout the State except Kasaragod Taluk of Malabar

District : 

 Marati 

Explanation.________________
Explanation.
Explanation.
Explanation.

Reorganization 

In  this  Schedule,  Malabar  District  shall  mean  the  Malabar  District 
referred  to  in  sub-section  (2) of Section 
5  of  the  States 
Act, 1956. 

PART II 
GENERAL RULES 

1. Scope of the General Rules.______ The rules in this part shall apply to all State
and Subordinate Services and the holders of all posts, whether temporary or permanent in 
any  such  service,  appointed    thereto  before,  or  after  the  date  on  which  these  rules  come 
into  force  as  provided  in  sub-rule(b)  of  rule  1  in  Part  I  except  to  the  extent  otherwise 
expressly provided, (a) by or under any law for the time-being in force, or (b) in respect of 
any member of such service by a contract or agreement subsisting between such member 
and the State Government: 

Provided that the rules in this part shall also be applicable to holders of all posts in 
Government Service eventhough the posts they hold are not classified as coming under a 

particular  service  by  including  in  Schedule  I  or  Schedule  II  of  the    Kerala  Civil  Services 
(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1960.  

2. Relation  to  the  Special  Rules.______  If  any  provision  in  the  General  Rules
contained  in  the  Part  is  repugnant  to  a  provision  in  the  Special  Rules  applicable  to  any 
particular  service  contained  in  Part  III,  the  latter  shall,  in  respect  of  that  service,  prevail 
over the provision in the General Rules in this Part. 

3. Approved Candidates.______ (a) All first appointments to the service shall be made
by  the  Appointing  Authority  on  the  advice  of  the  Commission  in  respect  of  posts  falling 
within the purview of the Commission and in all other cases by the Appointing Authority 
from a list of approved candidates prepared in the prescribed manner. 

(b)

The  inclusion  of  a  candidate's  name  in  any  list  of  approved  candidates  for
any service (State or Subordinate) or any class or category in a service, shall not confer on 
him any claim to appointment to the service, class or category. 

(c)

Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  these  rules,  the  Commission  shall
have the power to cancel the advice for appointment of any candidate to any service if it is 
subsequently  found  that  such  advice  was  made  under  some  mistake.    On  such 
cancellation, the appointing authority shall terminate the service of the candidate: 

Provided that the cancellation of advice for appointment by the Commission and the 
subsequent  termination  of  service  of  the  candidates  by  the  appointing  authority  shall  be 
made within a period of one year from the date of such advice: 

Provided  further  that,  a  cancellation  of  advice  under  this  sub-rule  shall  be  made 
only  after  giving  the  candidate  concerned  a  reasonable  opportunity  of  being  heard  in the 
matter. 

    The provisions in this sub-rule shall be deemed to have come into force on the 31st

July 1969. 

4.

Every  candidate  for  appointment  to  any  service  or  for  admission  to  any
suitability/eligibility  test,  whether  a  member  of  a  service  or  not,  who  in  response  to  a 
notification issued by the Commission makes an application, shall make such application 
in  the  form  printed  and  distributed  under  the  authority  of  the  Commission.    The  cost  of 
such  application  shall  be  Rs.  5  (Rupees  five  only)  for  Scheduled  Castes  and  Scheduled 
Tribes candidates and Rs. 10 (Rupees ten only) for all other candidates. 

4A.   Every  candidate  who  applies  for  admission  to  the  Special/Departmental 
tests conducted by the Public Service Commission or for certificate of pass/attendance or 
for  mark  lists  thereof  shall  be  required  to  remit  a  fee  as  may  be  prescribed  by  the 
Commission with the prior approval of the Government, for each paper of these tests or for 
certificate of pass as the case may be and such fee shall be specified by the Commission in 
the notification inviting applications for admission to such tests. 

Note.______ 

Photo  copies  of  Optical  Mark  Recoginition 
the  candidates  by 
to 
be  made  available 
Commission on request and subject to payment of a fee of Rs.200 (Two    

(OMR)  answer  scripts  shall 
the  Kerala  Public  Service 

hundred only) for each answer script. The candidates shall submit    
separate application for each answer script to the Kerala Public Service 
Commission after remitting the prescribed fee in the specified Head of   
Account. 

5.

Method of recruitment.______ Where the normal method of recruitment to any
service, class or category is neither solely by direct recruitment nor solely by transfer, but 
is both by direct recruitment and by transfer._____

(a) the  proportion  or  order  in  which  the  Special  Rules  concerned  may  require
vacancies to be filled by persons recruited direct and by  those recruited by  transfer  shall 
be applicable only to substantive vacancies in the permanent cadre; 

(b) person shall be recruited direct only against a substantive vacancy in such
permanent  cadre,  and  only  if  the  vacancy  is  one  which  should  be  filled  by  direct  recruit 
under the Special Rules referred to in clause (a); and 

(c) recruitment to all other vacancies shall be made by transfer.

Note.__ (1) 

All permanent vacancies and temporary vacancies except those of short duration 
shall be treated as substantive vacancies. 

(2)

The vacancies on account of leave and deputation with a duration of less

than six months shall be treated as vacancies of short duration, provided, 
vacancies with a duration of three   months to six months should not    
treated as vacancies of short  duration, if the vacancies are likely to    
long or new vacancies are likely to arise. 

 such 
 be 
 last 

(3)

for  different  methods  of
Whenever  a  ratio  or  percentage 
recruitment/appointment  to  a  post  the  number  of  vacancies  to  be  filled  up  by
candidates  from  each  method  shall  be  decided  by  applying  the  fixed  ratio  or
percentage to the cadre strength of the post to  which the recruitment/transfer
is made and not to the vacancies existing at that time.

fixed 

is 

5A.   Award  of  weightage  marks  in  District-wise  recruitments.______  Where  the
method of recruitment to any post of any service, class or category is by direct recruitment
on district-wise basis, such candidate belonging to that district shall be given a weightage
of 5 marks for a selection:

Provided  that  candidates  who  are  eligible  to  get  the  above  weightage  marks  shall 
produce    a  nativity  certificate  issued  by  a  Competent  Authority  not  below  the  rank  of  a 
Tahsildar of the concerned District as and when called for 

ANNEXURE 
Technical Posts 

Driver (Heavy Duty Vehicle)  : Various Departments including the Departments of

 Excise, NCC, Sainik Welfare and Tourism. 

Driver (Light Duty Vehicle) 

:  Various Departments including the Departments of 

 Excise, NCC, Sainik Welfare and Tourism. 

Mechanic

Plumber

:   Fisheries Department. 

:   Public Works Department. 

Dark Room Assistant

:   Public Relations Department. 

Attender (Graining Plates)

:   Survey and Land Records Department. 

Attender (Plate Cleaning)

:   Survey and Land Records Department. 

Roller Cleaner

:   Public Works Department. 

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

Oil Engine Driver

:   Agriculture Department. 

Power Laundry Attender

:   Technical Education Department. 

Deckman

Boat Driver

:   Various Department. 

:   Various Department. 

Cinema Operator

:   Public Relations Department. 

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

Driver-Cum-Operator

15.

Boat Syrang

:   Scheduled Caste Development Department/ 
    Scheduled Tribe Development Department. 
:   Various Departments 

Non-Technical Posts 

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

Ayah

Masseur

Attender

Attender

: Scheduled Caste Development Department/Scheduled 

 Tribe Development Department 
:  Ayurveda College 

:  Judicial Department. 

:  Survey and Land Records Department. 

Post in Last Grade Service

:  Various Department. 

Last Grade Service

:  National Cader Corps Department. 

Last Grade Service

:  Sainik Welfare Department. 

Villageman

:  Revenue Department. 

Gate Keeper Grade II/Lascar Grade II: Printing Department.

Lascar

:  Agricultural Income Tax and Sales Tax Department. 

Gallery Pressman Grade II

:  Government Presses. 

Fisherman

:  Fisheries Department. 

Gallery Attendant

:  Sri Chitra Art Gallery. 

Helper, Pre-Primary Schools  :  Education Department.

Excise Guards

Forest Guards

:  Excise Department. 

:  Forest Department. 

Projector Operator

:  Education Department. 

Depot Watcher/Reserve Watcher

:  Forest Department.   

6.

Right  of  probationers  and  approved  probationers  to  reappointment
.______ A  vacancy  in  any  service,  class  or  category  not  being  a  vacancy  which  should  be 
filled by direct recruitment under the Special Rules referred to in clause (a) of rule 5 shall 
not be filled by the appointment of a person who has not yet commenced his probation in 
such service, class or category when  an approved probationer or a probationer therein is 
available for such appointment. 

7.

Discharge  and  re-appointment  of  probationers  and  approved
The  order  in  which  probationers  and  approved  probationers 
probationers.______ 
shall be  discharged for want of  vacancies shall  be: ______    first, the probationers in order 
of juniority, and second the approved probationers in order of juniority. 

(a) 

(b)

Approved probationers and probationers who have been discharged for want
of vacancies shall be re-appointed as vacancies arise in the inverse of the order laid down 
in sub-rule (a): 

Provided  (1)  that  the  said  order  may  be  departed  from  in  cases  where  such  order 
would  involve  excessive  expenditure  on  traveling  allowance  or  exceptional  administrative 
inconvenience,  and  (2)  that  such  order  may  be  departed  from  in  the  case  of  Scheduled 
Castes, Scheduled  Tribes  and  other Backward  Classes  in  accordance  with  the  provisions 
in the Special Rules contained in Part III relating to the relevant service: 

Provided  further  that  in  the  case  of  posts  in  more  than  one  Department/ 
institution,  for  which  a  common  selective  list  is  prepared  by  the  Commission,  the 
candidates  discharged  from  service  for  want  of  vacancies  may  either  re-register  their 
names  in  the  Office  of  the  Commission  and  get  themselves  re-appointed  on  the  further 
advice  of  the  Commission,  or  they  may  await  their  turn  for  re-appointment  to  the  posts 
under sub-rule (b) in case they desire to continue as probationers in the posts from which 
they were discharged. 

This  amendments  shall  be  deemed  to  have  come  into  force  with  effect  from  17  th

December 1958. 

8.

Members absent from duty.______  The  absence  of  a  member  of  a  service
from duty in such service, whether on leave, other than Leave Without Allowance granted 
and availed of as per Appendix XII A, Appendix XII B or Appendix XII C of Part I of Kerala 
Services Rules,    on foreign service  or  on  deputation  or for any  other  reason  and whether 
his lien in a post borne on the cadre of such service is suspended or not, shall not, if he is 
otherwise fit, render him ineligible in his turn, _____   

(a)

for  re-appointment  to  a  substantive  or  officiating  vacancy  in  the  class,

category, grade or post in which he may be a probationer or an approved probationer; 

(b)

(c)

for promotion from a lower to a higher category in such service; and

for appointment to any substantive or officiating vacancy in another service

for which he may be an approved candidate; 

As the case may be, in the same manner as if he had not been absent.  He shall be entitled 
to all the privileges in respect of appointment, seniority, probation and appointment as full 
member which he would have enjoyed but for his absence: 

Provided  that  subject  to  the  provisions  of  rule  18  he  shall  satisfactorily  complete 

the period of probation on his return; 

Provided further that a member of a service who is appointed to another service and 
is  a  probationer  or  an  approved  probationer  in  the  latter  service,  shall  not  be  appointed 
under  the  clause  (c)  to  any  other  service  for  which  he  may  be  an  approved  candidate 
unless he relinquishes his membership in the latter service in which he is a probationer or 
an approved probationer. 

Provided  further  that  this  rule  shall  not  have  retrospective  effect  so  as  to  disturb 
the  decisions  taken  by  the  Travancore-Cochin  Government  in  respect  of  the  Travancore-
Cochin personnel: 

Provided  also  that  this  rule  shall  not  apply  in  the  case  of  a  member  of  a  service 
whose  absence  from  duty  in  such  service  is  by  reason  of  his  appointment    to  another 

service not being Military Service, solely on his own application, unless such appointment 
is made in the exigencies of public service.  

Note.__(1)

An  appointment  made  in  pursuance  of  applications  invited,  sponsored  or 
recommended  by  Government  or  other  competent  authority  shall  be  deemed  to 
be  an  appointment  made  in  the  exigencies  of  Public  Service  for  the  purpose  of 
this rule. 

(2)

The  benefit  of  the  rule  shall  not  be  available  to  a  person  holding  a  post  in  any
class or category in a service if his appointment to that post was from a post in
another class or category in the same service.

9. 

Temporary appointments.____ (a) 

Where it is necessary in the public 
interest,  owing  to  an  emergency  which has  arisen  to fill immediately  a  vacancy  in  a  post 
borne  on  the  cadre  of  a  service,  class  or  category  and  there  would  be    undue  delay  in 
making  such  appointment  in  accordance  with  these  rules  and  the  Special  Rules,  the 
appointing  authority  may  appoint  a  person,  otherwise  than  in  accordance  with  the  said 
rules, temporarily:  

(i) 

Provided  that  before  a  person  is  appointed  under  this  clause,  persons  who  are 
admittedly  senior  to  him  shall  also  be  appointed,  even  if  they  are  absent  from  duty, 
whether  on  leave  other  than  leave  without  allowances  granted  and  availed  of  as  per 
Appendix XII A, Appendix XII B or Appendix XII C of Part I of the Kerala Services Rules or 
on foreign service or on deputation or for any other valid reason, except due to suspension 
and allowed to continue as such subject to the condition that persons so appointed shall 
not  be  eligible  for  the  higher  time  scale  of  pay  by  virtue  of  such  appointments  unless 
otherwise specifically ordered by the Government. 

(2)

Note.____(1)  Even  where  it is considered necessary to sanction the  higher time scale of  pay 
not  more  than  one  person  (either  the    senior-most  fit  person  in  a  series  of 
adjacent persons outside the ordinary line, or, if such a person either forgoes the 
benefit of his own volition or does not require the benefit by virtue of his holding 
a post outside the ordinary line which secures him at least equivalent benefits in 
respect  of  salary  and  pension,  then  the  next  below  in  the  series)  may  be 
authorized to  draw the salary of the higher scale or grade in respect of any one 
officiating vacancy within the cadre filled by his junior. 
A  fortuitous  officiating  appointment  given  to  a  person  who  is  junior  to  one
outside the regular line  does  not in itself give rise to a  claim on the  part of the
senior to the higher time scale of pay.
The  expression  "persons  who  are  admittedly  senior"  in  the  above  proviso  shall
include persons appointed/promoted temporarily and continuing as such solely
due to administrative delay in regularizing their appointments.
A  person  who  is  on  leave  without  allowances  granted  and  availed  of  as  per
Appendix XII A, Appendix XII B or Appendix XII C of Part I of the Kerala Services
Rules  shall  be  given  promotion  to  a  higher  post  only  on  his  return  from  such
leave.    His  rank  and  seniority  in  the  higher  post  shall  be  determined  with
reference to the date of promotion.
If a junior is appointed temporarily in preference to a senior under suspension,
at  the  time  of  reinstatement  of  the  senior  to  duty  fully  exonerating  him  of  the
charges for suspension the senior shall be given appointment to the vacancy in
the higher post to which he would have been appointed but for the suspension,
if necessary by reverting the junior who got appointment in that vacancy:

(4)

(5)

(3)

Provided further that a person appointed under this clause by direct recruitment to 
a post other than teaching post and a post covered by the proviso to clause (iii) of rule 10 

(b) shall not be allowed to continue in such post for a period exceeding  one hundred and
eighty days:

Provided  also  that  if  a  person  belonging  to  any  of  the  Scheduled  Castes  or 
Scheduled Tribes appointed under this clause was in service as on 2 nd August, 1984, he 
shall be allowed to continue in service even if the period of 180 days expires subject to the 
conditions that, 

(1)

the  benefit  shall  not  be  available  to  a  person  belonging  to  any  of  the
Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes appointed under this clause to a post reserved for 
Scheduled  Castes  or  Scheduled  Tribes  for  Special  Recruitment  on  the  basis  of  the 
instructions  issued  in  Government  Circular  No.  88342/EC.A2/83/GAD    dated  the  21  st 
January, 1984; 

(2)

he  shall  not  be  allowed  to  continue  in  service  in  preference  to  a  candidate

advised by the Kerala Public Service Commission; and 

(3)

such continuance shall be allowed only if there is vacancy available for him

to continue: 

Provided also that a person appointed under this clause by direct recruitment to a 

teaching post shall be allowed to continue, subject to availability of vacancy ____

(a)

in case the institution is one to which regular annual vacations are allowed,
till the closing date of the institution for the annual vacation or till a candidate advised by 
the Public Service Commission joins duty, whichever is earlier; 

(b)

in  case  the  institution  is  one  to  which  regular  annual  vacation  is  not
allowed,  for  a  period  not  exceeding  one  year  or  till  a  candidate  advised  by  the  Public 
Service Commission joins duty whichever is earlier. 

Explanation.____ 

For the  purpose  of the  proviso,  the  institutions  specified  below  shall 
be  deemed  to  be  institutions  to  which  regular  annual  vacations  are 
not allowed, namely:______

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Name  of the Institutions 

----------- 

Heads of Departments in 
 respect of the Institutions 

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.

2.

3.

4.

------ 

 ( 1 ) 

Medical College, Trivandrum,
Kottayam, Calicut and Trichur

( 2 ) 

Principal 

T.D. Medical College, Alleppey

Principal 

Kerala Institute of Nautical
Studies, Vizhinjam

Director of Ports 

Government Homoeopathic
Medical College, Calicut and
Trivandrum

Principal 

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

Tailoring and Garment making
Training Centres

Director of Harijan Welfare 

Tailoring Trade Schools

Director of Harijan Welfare 

Vocational Training Centres

Director of Harijan Welfare 

Industrial Training Insitute,
Neyyattinkara

Industrial Training Institute.
Chackai

Industrial Training Institute for
for Women, Kazhakkoottam

Industrial Training Institute,
Chandanathope, Quilon

Industrial Training Institute,
Chengannoor

Industrial Training Institute,
Ettumannoor

Industrial Training Institute,
Kalamassery

Industrial Training Institute,
Chalakudy

Industrial Training Institute,
Malampuzha

Industrial Training Institute,
Calicut

Industrial Training Institute,
Areacode, Malappuram

Industrial Training Institute,
Attingal

Industrial Training Institute,
Thottada

P.T. Chacko Memorial Industrial
Training Institute,  Pallickathode,
Kottayam

Industrial Training Institute,
Kattappana

Related Instruction Centre,
Trivandrum

Director of Training, Trivandrum 

Director of Training, Trivandrum 

Director of Training, Trivandrum 

Director of Training, Trivandrum 

Director of Training, Trivandrum 

Director of Training, Trivandrum 

Director of Training, Trivandrum 

Director of Training, Trivandrum 

Director of Training, Trivandrum 

Director of Training, Trivandrum 

Director of Training, Trivandrum 

Director of Training, Trivandrum 

Director of Training, Trivandrum 

Director of Training, Trivandrum 

Director of Training, Trivandrum 

Director of Training, Trivandrum 

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

Related Instruction Centre,
Quilon

Related Instruction Centre,
Kottayam

Related Instruction Centre,
Alleppey

Related Instruction Centre,
Trichur

Related Instruction Centre,
Kalamassery

Related Instruction Centre,
Calicut

Poultry  Training Institute,
Central Hatchery, Chengannoor

Chick Sexing School at Central
Hatchery, Chengannoor

Government Survey  Schools
at Trivandrum, Kottayam, Trichur,
Kozhikode, Cannanore

Director of Training, Trivandrum 

Director of Training, Trivandrum 

Director of Training, Trivandrum 

Director of Training, Trivandrum 

Director of Training, Trivandrum 

Director of Training, Trivandrum 

Director of Animal Husbandry 

Director of Animal Husbandry 

Director of Survey and Land Records 

Sree  Visakom  Tirunal  School
of Epigraphy

Director of Archeology 

Tailoring  and  Garment   Making
Schools  at  Pattom,  Thevally
Kanjikuzhy,  Tripunithura,
Njarakkal,  Trichur,  Kalpathy,
Kondotty, Badagara,Dharmadom,
Payyannur

Director of Technicial Education, 
Trivandrum 

Tailoring Trade School, Harippad
and Devicolam

Director of Technicial Education, 
 Trivandrum 

Tailoring  Training Centres at
Parassala, Pachallur, Karimkulam,
Kundala, Chirayinkil, Kanjiramkulam
& Chengannur

Director of Technicial Education, 
Trivandrum    

Tailoring and Garment Making
Training Centres at Kumili,
Thodupuzha, Cheranallur,
Kadappuram, Mannarghat,
Mankada, Ponnani, Vengara,
Kuttichira, Sultan Battery
and Kasargod

Director of Technicial Education, 
 Trivandrum 

38. Weaving Training Centre
Aralamoodu, Trivandrum

Director of Technicial Education, 
Trivandrum 

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

Composing & Printing Centre,
Vattiyoorkavu

Director of Technical Education, 
 Trivandrum 

Book Binding Centres, Manacaud
and Kulathoor

Director of Technicial Education, 
Trivandrum 

Rattan Training Centre at
Paraneeyam

Director of Technicial Education, 
 Trivandrum 

Training Institute for Local
Administration, Trivandrum
and Calicut

Director of Panchayats, Trivandrum 

Trade School, Mundakayam
(Plantation Corporation's Control)

Labour Commissioner 

Training Institutions under
Health Department

Home for the Mentally deficient
children, Trivandrum and
Calicut

Director of Health Services 

Local Administration and Social welfare 
Department 

46.

Training Centre, Pallithura

Director of Industries and Commerce 

47.

Government Children's Home
and Special School, Trivandrum
Trichur, Kottayam and Kozhikode

Inspector General of Prisons 

48.

Borstal School, Cannanore

Inspector General of Prisons 

49.

Five Fisherman Training
Centres, Ernakulam

Director of Fisheries 

50.

Staff Training Centres, Ernakulam

Director of Fisheries 

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

Government Ayurveda College
Trivandrum and Tripunithura
(except Lectures in Sanskrit and
Physical Education)

Forest Training Schools at
Walayar & Arippa

Industrial Training Institute
for Women, Quilon

Industrial Training Institute,
Cheneerkara, Pathanamthitta

Industrial Training Institute,
Mala

Principal 

Chief Conservator of Forests 

Director of Training, Trivandrum 

Director of Training, Trivandrum 

Director of Training, Trivandrum 

 
56 

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

 Industrial Training Institute 
 for Women, Calicut 

Industrial Training Institute
Kalpetta
Industrial Training Institute,
Quilandy

Industrial Training Institute,
Kasaragod

Director of Training, Trivandrum 

Director of Training, Trivandrum, 

Director of Training, Trivandrum 

Director of Training, Trivandrum 

Related Instruction Centre,
Palakkad.

Director of Training,  
 Thiruvananthapuram 

Industrial Training Institute
for Women, Chengannur

Director of Training, 

 Thiruvananthapuram 

Industrial Training Institute
for Women, Kalamassery

Director of Training,  
 Thiruvananthapuram 

Industrial Training Institute
for Women, Chalakkudy

Director of Training,  
 Thiruvananthapuram 

Industrial Training Institute
for Women, Malampuzha

Director of Training,  
 Thiruvananthapuram 

Industrial Training Institute
for Women, Kannur

Director of Training,  
 Thiruvananthapuram 

Industrial Training Institute
Aryanad

Director of Training,  
 Thiruvananthapuram 

Provided also that Assistant Surgeons in the Health Services Department, lecturers 
in  the  Medical  Education  Department,  Medical  Officers  in  the  Departments  of  Indian 
Systems  of  Medicine  and  Homeopathy,  Government  Ayurveda  Colleges,  Government 
Homeopathic  Medical  Colleges  and  employees  State  Insurance,  Para  Medical  Staff  of  the 
above  Departments  and  Institutions  and  the  Basic  Health  Workers/Health  Assistants  of 
Health  Service  Department  Veterinary  Surgeons,  Livestock  Inspectors  and  Laboratory 
Technicians  in  the  Animal  Husbandry  Department  appointed  under  this  clause  by  direct 
recruitment  shall  be  allowed  to  continue  for  a  period  not  exceeding  one  year  or  till  a 
candidate advised by the Public Service Commission joins duty, whichever is earlier. 

Provided also that Medical Officers and Para Medical Staff in the Insurance Medical 
Services Department appointed under this clause shall be allowed to continue for a period 
not exceeding one year or till a candidate advised by the Public Service Commission joins 
duty, whichever is earlier.  

Provided also that the provisionally appointed Wardens in the Hostels for Scheduled 
Caste/Scheduled Tribe students shall be allowed to continue in service till the closing date 
of  the  institutions  for  annual  vacation  or  till  a  candidate  advised  by  the  Public  Service 
Commission joins duty, whichever is earlier. 

Note.____

Provisional appointment in the post of Warden shall be made only after reporting 
the vacancies to the Public Service Commission and getting the report from the 
Public Service Commission that there is no list of candidates readily available for 
recruitment.   

Provided  also  that  no  person  who  does  not  possess  the  qualifications,  if  any, 
prescribed for the  said service,  class or category,  shall  ordinarily  be appointed under 
this clause.  Every person who does not possess such qualifications and who has been or 
is  appointed  under  this  clause  shall  be  replaced,  as  soon  as  possible,  by  appointing  a 
person possessing such qualifications: 

Provided also that a person appointed under this clause by direct recruitment to a 
post and discharged from service after the admissible period, shall not be re-appointed to 
the  same  post    by  the  same  appointing  authority,  except  when  fresh  candidates  are  not 
available for appointment through Employment Exchange, and such re-appointment shall 
be made only with the prior concurrence of the Commission. 

(ii)

Where it is necessary to fill a short vacancy in a post borne on the cadre of a
service,  class  or  category  and  the  appointment  of  the  person  who  is  entitled  to  such 
appointment under these rules and the Special Rules, would involve excessive expenditure 
on  traveling  allowance  or  exceptional  administrative  inconvenience,  the  appointing 
authority  may  appoint  any  other  person  who  possesses  the  qualifications,  if  any, 
prescribed for the said service, class or category. 

(iii)

A person appointed under clause (i) shall be replaced as soon as possible by
a member of the service or an approved candidate qualified to hold the post under the said 
rules: 

Provided  that  persons  appointed  under  clause  (i)  shall  be  replaced  in  the  order  of 

seniority based on length of temporary service in the unit. 

Note.____

For  the  purpose  of  this  proviso,  posts  within  the  jurisdiction  of  an  Appointing 
Authority shall be treated as a unit. 

(iv)

A  person  appointed  under  clause    (i)  or    (ii)  shall    not    be  regarded  as  a
probationer  in  such  service,  class  or  category  or  be  entitled  by  reason  only  of  such 
appointment  to  any  preferential  claim  to  future  appointment  to  such  service,  class  or 
category. 

(v)

There shall be  paid to a person appointed under clause (I)  or clause (ii) the

minimum pay in the time-scale of pay applicable to such service, class or category: 

Provided  that,  if  the  person appointed is a member of another service, he shall be 
paid the pay admissible to him in the higher time-scale based on the pay in the lower time 
scale applicable to him under the rules regulating the fixation of pay, if such pay is higher. 
He  shall  be  paid  increments  in  the  time  scale  at  the  time  intervals,    as  fixed  by  the 
Government from time to time: 

Provided 

further  that  persons  appointed  temporarily  through  Employment 
Exchanges  shall  not  be  eligible  for  increment  in  the  time-scale  even  if  they  complete  the 
prescribed period of service fixed for sanctioning such increment. 

(b)

A  person  appointed to any part-time  post  created  in  lieu of a  whole time
post  borne  on  the  cadre  of  a  service,  class  or  category  shall  not  be  regarded  as  a 

probationer in such service nor shall he be entitled by reason only of such appointment to 
any preferential claim to future appointment to such service, class or category. 

(c)

Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, if and when a temporary
post is created as an addition to the cadre of any service, class or category and the holder 
thereof  is  required  by  the  State  Government  to  possess  any  special  qualifications, 
knowledge  or  experience,  any  person  who  possesses  such  qualifications,  knowledge  or 
experience,  and  is  considered  to  be  the  best  fitted  to  discharge  the  duties  of  such  post 
may,  irrespective  of  other  considerations,  be  appointed  to  that  post  by  the  appointing 
authority; but the person so appointed shall not, by reason only of such appointment, be 
regard as a probationer in such service, class or category nor shall he acquire thereby any 
preferential right to future appointment to such service, class or category. 

(d)

Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules or in the Special Rules if
and when a vacancy arises in a post borne on the cadre of a service, class or category for 
appointment  to  which  knowledge  of  a  particular  regional  language  is  necessary  in  the 
opinion of the State Government and the person who is entitled to appointment to the post 
under  these  rules  and  the  Special  Rules  does  not  possess  such  knowledge,  any  other 
person junior to him who had studied the respective regional language from Standard I to 
Standard  I0  as  the  medium  of  instruction  and  possesses  such  qualification  and  other 
qualifications,  if  any,  prescribed  under  the  rules  may  be  appointed  to  that  post;  but  the 
person  so  appointed  shall  not,  by  reason  only  of  such  appointment,  be  regarded  as  a 
probationer in such service, class or category, nor shall he acquire thereby any preferential 
right to future appointment to such service, class or category. 

(e)

Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules the Government may by
order  regularize  the  services  of  any  person  appointed  directly  under  clause  (i)of  sub-rule 
(a), if such person,____

(i)

has two years continuous service on 22 nd December 1973 in one category of

post in the same Department, or 

(ii)

is  physically  handicapped  and  was  in  service  on  any  day  during  the  period
commencing  on  and  from  the  22  nd  December    1973  and  ending  with  the  1  st  January 
1974, or 

(iii)

is physically handicapped and has put in a total service of one year or more
(including  broken  periods)  during  the  period  commencing  on  and  from  the  1st  January 
1968 and ending with the 31 st December 1979, or 

(iv)
1981.  or 

is  physically  handicapped  and  was  in  service  on  any  day  during  the  year

(v)

is physically handicapped and was in service for any day during the period

commencing on and from the 1 st January, 1983 and ending with the 31 st July 1994. 

[(v) 

 is a member of the Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe and was in service 

as on 2 nd August 1984. 

(vi)

is physically handicapped and has to his/her credit one year of total service
(including  broken  periods)  as  on  5  th  January  1984,  from  I  st  January  1968.    (excluding 
1981) in one or more categories of posts in the same or different Departments. 

Explanation.____ 

For  the  purpose  of  this  sub-rule,  a  physically  handicapped  person 
means  a  “person  with  disability”  as  defined  in  the  Persons  with 
Disabilities  (Equal  Opportunities,  Protection  of  Rights  and  Full 
Participation) Act, 1995 ( Act No. 1 of 1996)  

Note.____(1)

Note.____(2)

The medical certificates issued to physically handicapped persons to prove their 
physical  handicap  shall,  in  the  case  of  orthopaedically  handicapped  persons, 
specify whether the handicap causes, interference with their normal functioning 
of the bones, muscles and joints 

For  the  purpose  of  reckoning  the  period  of  two  years  continuous  service 
prescribed  in  this  sub-rule,  the  period  during  which  a  person  continued  in 
service, after the  date  of receipt  by  him  of  the order  of the  competent authority 
terminating  his  service,  by  virtue  of  any  order  of  Court  staying  such  order  of 
termination,  shall  not  be  taken  into  account  unless  such  order  of  termination, 
has been finally quashed by the Court. 

Provided  that  the  services  of  any  person  shall  not  be  regularized  under  this  sub-
rule, unless he satisfies the conditions prescribed in sub-rule (b) of rule 10 of these rules. 

Appointment by agreements._____  (1) When in the opinion of the State Government 
9A. 
special  provisions  inconsistent  with  any  of  these  rules  or  of  any  other  rules  made  under 
the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution  of India or continued by Article 313 of that 
Constitution (hereinafter referred to in this rule as the said rules) are required in respect of 
conditions of service, pay and allowances, pension, discipline and conduct with reference 
to any particular posts, or any of them, it shall be open to the State Government to make 
an  appointment  to  such  post  otherwise  than  in  accordance  with  these  rules  or  the  said 
rules and to provide by agreement with the persons so appointed for any of the matters in 
respect of which in the opinion of the State Government special provisions are required to 
be made and to the extent to which such provisions are made in the agreement, nothing in 
these  rules  or  the  said  rules  shall  apply  to  any  person  so  appointed  in  respect  of  any 
matter for which provision is made in the agreement: 

Provided  that  in  every  agreement  made  in  exercise  of  the  power  conferred  by  this 
rule  it  shall  further  be  provided  that  in  respect  of  any  matter  in  respect  of  which  no 
provision has been made in the agreement the provisions of these rules or of the said rules 
shall apply. 

(2)

A person appointed under sub-rule (1) shall not be regarded as a member of
the service in which the post to which he is appointed is included and shall not be entitled 
by reason only of such appointment to any preferential claim to any other appointment in 
that or any other service. 

9B.  Notwithstanding anything contained in these Rules or in the Special Rules, 
the Government, may, in public interest and for reasons to be recorded in writing, depute 
or transfer officers from one service to another or from one Department to another within 
the same service or sent to or take in officers from other Governments or Statutory Bodies 
subject to such conditions as the Government may in each case impose: 

Provided that in the case of transfers in the interest of security of State, the reasons 
need  not  be  recorded  if  Government  are  satisfied  that  it  is  not  expedient  to  disclose  the 
reasons for such transfer: 

Provided  further  that  the  Commission  shall  be  consulted  in  respect  of  such 
deputations and transfers whenever such consultation has not been specifically excluded 
by  the  provisions  of  the  Kerala  Public  Service  Commission  (Consultation)  Regulations, 
1957. 

10.

Qualifications._____

(a) (i)  The  educational  or  other  qualifications,
if  any,  required  for  a  post  shall  be  as  specified  in  the  Special  Rules  applicable  to  the 
service in which that post is included or as specified in the executive orders of Government 
in cases where Special Rules have not been issued for the post/service. 

(ii)

Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  these  rules  or  in  the  Special  Rules,
the  qualifications  recognized  by  executive  orders  or  standing  orders  of  Government  as 
equivalent to a qualification specified for a post, in the Special Rules or found acceptable 
by  the  Commission  as  per  rule  13  (b)  (i)  of  the  said  rules  in  cases  where  acceptance  of 
equivalent qualifications is provided for in the rules and such of those qualifications which 
pre-suppose the acquisition of the lower qualification prescribed for the post, shall also be 
sufficient for the post. 

(aa) 

The  minimum  general  educational  qualification  of  the  S.S.L.C  Standard 
wherever  referred  to  in  the  special  Rules  shall  mean  the  qualifications  specified  in  the 
Schedule to this Part.   

(aaa)  Where  the  Special  Rules  for  any  service  prescribe  the  possession  of  the 
minimum  general  educational  qualification  of  the  S.S.L.C  Standard  referred  to  in  clause 
(aa) as a qualification for appointment as full member in such service, or in any class or 
category  thereof,  or  for  promotion  to  any  other  class  or  category  in  such  service,  or  for 
appointment  by  transfer  to  any  other service, a  person  already  in service  on  31.10.1956. 
or  a  person  who  was  advised  for  appointment  by  the  Public  Service  Commission  on  or 
before 31.10.1956, irrespective of the date of his joining duty on such advice and who does 
not  possess  the  above  qualification  but  who  is  certified  by  the  Head  of  the  Department 
concerned  to  be  otherwise  deserving  of  appointment  as  full  member  or  promotion  or,  as 
the  case  may  be,  transfer  shall  be  deemed  to  possess  the  minimum  general  educational 
qualification  of  the  S.S.L.C  Standard  if  he  appears  for  the  examination  of  the  S.S.L.C 
Standard conducted by the commission and secures the minimum percentage of marks to 
be prescribed from time to time.  

(aaaa)  Notwithstanding anything contained in these Rules or in the Special Rules, 
persons  belonging  to  linguistic  minorities  who  take  the  recruitment  test  in  a  language 
other than in Malayalam and are appointed to any service shall pass the language test in 
Malayalam  prescribed  in  G.O.  (Ms)  No.  142/PD    dated,  31.03.1966  within  a  maximum 
period of ten years from the date of appointment.  In cases where the persons concerned 
have to be on probation, passing of the test shall be a condition for successful completion 
of  probation,  and  their  periods  of  probation  shall,  if  necessary,  be  extended  up  to  a 
maximum  period  of  ten  years.    Such  extension  of  probation  shall  not  however  entail 
postponement  of  increment.    Persons  who  fail  to  pass  the  test  within  the  period  of  ten 
years from the date of appointment shall be discharged from service.  

Persons  in  service  belonging  to  linguistic  minorities  appointed  to  any  service  by 
transfer or by promotion shall also pass the above language test in Malayalam, if they have 
not  already  passed  the  test  subject  to  the  conditions  specified  above  excepting  condition 
regarding  discharge  from  service.    Such  persons  who  fail  to  pass  the  test  within  the 
prescribed  period  of  ten  years  shall  be  reverted  to  the  posts  held  by  them  before  their 
appointment by transfer of promotion:  

Provided that a person referred to in this sub-rule who has been in service for more 
than 4 years on the date of commencement of the Kerala State and Subordinate Services 
(Amendment)  Rules,  1981,  published  under  Notification  No.  G.O.(P)  194/81/GAD.  Dated 
12.06.1981 shall be allowed to pass the language test in Malayalam within a period of two 
years from the said date, if he has not already passed the test. 

Explanation.___ For the purpose of this sub-rule, a person shall be deemed to have passed 
the  language  test  in  Malayalam  prescribed  in  G.O.  (Ms)  No.  142/PD 
dated, 31.03.1966 if he has taken Malayalam as Second language in the 
High School Courses or Degree Courses. 

(ab) 

Where  the  Special  Rules  or  Recruitment  Rules  for a post in any 
service  prescribe  qualification  of  experience,  it  shall,  unless  otherwise  specified,  be  one 
gained  by  persons  on  temporary  or  regular  appointment  in  capacities  other  than    paid  or 
un  paid  apprentices,  trainees  and  Casual  Labourers  in  Central  or  State  Government 
Service  or  in    Public  Sector  Undertaking  or  Registered  Private  Sector  Undertaking,  after 
acquiring the basic qualification prescribed for the post: 

Provided  that  the  experience  gained  as  factory  workers  on  daily  wages  of  a 
permanent  nature  may  be  accepted,  if  the  service  is  continuous  and  not  of  a  casual 
nature. 

Explanation.____ 

 For the purpose of this sub-rule, ‘Registered Private Sector 
 Undertaking’ means.____  

(i)

Co-operative Societies registered under the Kerala Co-operative Societies
Act,  1969,  Societies  Registered  under  the  Societies  Registration  Act  1860  or  the 
Travancore-Cochin  Literary,  Scientific  and  Charitable  Societies  Registration  Act,  1955  or 
Companies registered under the Companies Act, 1956 or any institution, firm or company 
which has a legal entity under any law for time being in force; 

(ii)
Commissioner; and 

Small  Scale  Industrial  Units  registered  with  the  Industrial  Development

(iii)

Industrial Institutions wherein Government have investments.

(abb)  Experience  for  179  days  gained  through  temporary  appointments  under
rule  9(a)  (i)  in  Departments  under  Government  or  Government/quasi  Government
Institutions or Public Sector undertakings shall be considered as experience therein for six
months for appointment to posts for which qualification of experience for not less than six
months is prescribed.

(b)

No  person  shall  be  eligible  for  appointment  to  any  service  by  direct

recruitment, unless  ____

(i)

he  satisfies  the  appointing  authority  that  he  is  of  sound  health,  active

habits and free from any bodily defect or infirmity rendering him unfit for such service; 

(ii)

that  he  does  not  have  more  than  one  wife  living  or,  if  the  person  is  a

woman, that she is not married to any person who has a wife living; and 

(iii)

the State Government are satisfied that his character and antecedents are

such as to qualify him for such service: 

Provided  that,  before  the  Government  are  satisfied  of  the  character  and 
antecedents  of    a  person  selected/advised  for  appointment  by  direct  recruitment,  the 
Appointing Authority may  appoint him/her  temporarily  under  clause  (i)  of  sub-rule (a)  of 
rule 9 of these rules subject to the condition that his/her appointment shall be terminated 
without  notice  if  Government  are  not  satisfied  of  his/her  character  and  antecedents  on 
subsequent verification and that he/she shall be eligible for appointment in regular service 
in  accordance  with  the  Rules  only  if  his/her  character  and  antecedents  are  found 
satisfactory on subsequent verification. 

Note.____ (1)  

A person  appointed  under  this  proviso shall not be treated as a 
member of the service to which he has been so appointed unless he/she    
is appointed in regular service in accordance with the rules. In case    
it is found that his/her character and antecedents are satisfactory,    
his/her temporary appointment shall be treated as appointment in regular 
service from the date to his/her temporary appointment to the service. 

(2)

The  Appointing  Authorities  shall  get  the  necessary  details  for  verification  of
character and antecedents of the candidates advised by the Commission from
the  candidates  themselves  before  they  are  allowed  to  join  duty  and  the
appointing authorities shall obtain the reports on the verification of character
and  antecedents  of  the  candidates  so  advised  within  a  period  not  exceeding
six months from the date of joining duty of the candidates.

(c)

The  upper  age  limit  prescribed  in  the  Special  Rules  shall,  unless
otherwise  stated,  be  raised  by  5  years  in  the  case  of  a  candidate  belonging  to  any  of  the 
Scheduled  Castes  or  adult  members  of  such  castes  and  their  children  when  such  adult 
members are converted to other religions, or Scheduled Tribes and by 3 years in the case 
of a candidate belonging to any of the Other Backward Classes: 

Provided that the age limit shall not apply_____

(i)

to  the  appointment  of  a  candidate  belonging  to  any  of  the    Scheduled
Castes or adult members of such castes and their children when such adult members are 
converted to other religions, or Scheduled Tribes to a post included in a service for which 
the Special Rules prescribe a qualification lower than a degree of a recognized University, if 
such  candidate  possesses  an  educational  qualification which  is higher  than that  referred 
to in sub-rule (a) and he is otherwise qualified for appointment; or   

(ii)

the appointment to a post included in a service of a candidate belonging
to any of the  Scheduled Castes or adult members of such castes and their children when 
such  adult  members  are  converted  to  other  religions,  or  Scheduled  Tribes  who  holds  a 
degree  of  a  recognized  University,  if  the  degree  he  holds  is  not  lower  than  the  degree,  if 
any, prescribed in the Special Rules for appointment to such posts and if he is otherwise 
qualified for appointment. 

Explanation.____  

'educational  qualification' 

The  expression 
(i)  of 
the  proviso  to  sub-rule  (c)  of  this  rule,  shall  mean  technical 
qualification in the case of technical posts and general educational  
qualification in the case of non-technical posts. 

in  clause 

(cc)

The  upper  age  limit  allowed  to  a  candidate  belonging  to  any  of  the
Scheduled  Castes  or  Scheduled  Tribes  under  Rule  10  (c)  and  the  provisos  there  under 
shall  up  to  31  st  March  1967,  apply  to  persons  actually  engaged  in  the  profession  of 
Goldsmiths or as lapidary workers for a period of at least six months prior to the issue of 
the Gold Control Rules, viz; 10  th January 1963 and who are thrown out of employment, 

irrespective  of  the  community  to  which  the  person  concerned  belongs.    Such  persons 
should  produce  certificates  issued  by  Revenue  Officers  not  below  the  rank  of  Tahsildars 
showing  that  they  were  actually  engaged  in  the  profession  of  Goldsmiths  or  as  lapidary 
workers  for  a  period  of  not  less  than  six  months  before  10  th  January  1963.    The 
concessions  available  under  this  sub-rule  to  the  persons  actually  engaged  in  the 
profession of Goldsmiths and lapidary workers will be available up to 31 st March 1967  to 
such persons as are residing with  and financially dependent  on them also, provided they 
produce certificates issued by Revenue Officers not below the rank of  Tahsildars showing 
that they were residing with and financially dependent on the persons actually engaged in 
the profession of Goldsmiths or lapidary workers for a period of at least six months prior to 
10 th January 1963. 

(d)

The  upper  age  limit  prescribed  in  the  Special  Rules  may  be  relaxed  by
the  commission  in  cases  where  the  appointment  has  to  be  made  in  consultation  with  it 
and by the State Government or by the Appointing Authority with the approval of the State 
Government in other cases, if age alone stands in the way of appointment of a candidate 
belonging to any of the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes to fill up the quota reserved 
for the group. 

(dd)

In the absence of qualified candidates within the age limit, the upper age

limit shall be relaxed up to 50 years for Special Recruitment. 

(e)

In  the  case  of  a  candidate  who  is  an  Ex-serviceman  or  Ex-General
Reserve Engineer Force person or a disembodied Territorial Army Person, the period of his 
service in the Defence Forces or in the General Reserve Engineer Force or in the Territorial 
Army, as the case may be and the period of unemployment on discharge up to a maximum 
of five years shall be excluded in computing his age for appointment. 

(f)

The  upper  age  limit  prescribed  in  the  Special  Rules  as  raised  by  the
Public Services (Raising of  Upper Age limit for Appointment) Rules 1972, shall be further 
raised by 3 years in the case of Land Verification Volunteers who were recruited during the 
year  1973-'74  under  the  Half-a  Million  Jobs  Programme  and  were  subsequently 
retrenched. 

Note.____ 

In  the  case  of  former  Land  Verification  Volunteers  belonging  to  any  of  the 
Scheduled  Castes/Scheduled  Tribes  or  Other  Backward  Clases  to  whom    the 
provisions  of  this  sub-rule  are  applicable,  the  upper  age  limit  shall  be  further 
raised as provided sub-rule (c)  

(g)

In the case of an Ex-Home Guard Volunteer who has completed 3 years
of  service  in  the  Home-Guards'  Organization  and  who  had  satisfactorily  undergone  the 
Home-Guards'  Training  during  the  period,  the  entire  period  of  his  service  in  the  Home-
Guards' Organization and the period of unemployment thereafter, up  to a maximum of 7 
years shall be excluded, in computing his age for appointment in Public Services.  

(h)

The entire period of service in the Personal Staff of Ministers/ Leader of
Opposition/Government  Chief  Whip/Speaker/Deputy  Speaker/  Chairmen  of  Financial 
Committees, rendered by a person (other than a Government Servant) shall be excluded in 
computing his age for appointment in Public Services subject to the overall age limit fixed 
in the Public Services (Raising of Upper Age Limit for Appointment.) Rules, 1978. 

11. Special Qualifications to be acquired or Special Tests to be passed during
probation.____  Where  a  probationer  has,  before  he  commenced  his  probation,  already 
acquired  any  special  qualification  or  passed  any  special  test  prescribed  by  the  Special 
Rules  or  has  acquired  such  other  qualification  as  may  be  considered  by  the  State 

Government or by the Appointing Authority with the approval of the State Government to 
be  equivalent  to  the  said  special  qualification  or  special  test,  he  shall  not  be  required  to 
acquire  such  special  qualification  or  to  pass  such  special  test  again  after  the 
commencement of his probation.   

for  promotion.____

12. Qualifications 

(a) Where  general  educational
qualifications, special qualifications or special tests are prescribed by the Special Rules of 
the  service  for  any  category,  grade  or  post  therein,  or  in  a  class  thereof,  which  are  not 
prescribed for a category or grade in such service or class carrying  a lower rate of pay and 
no member in the category or grade carrying the lower rate of pay is eligible for promotion 
to  such  category,  grade  or  posts  a  member  in  such  lower  category  of  grade  may  be 
promoted  to  the  category  or  grade  carrying  the  higher  rate  of  pay  temporarily  until  a 
member  of  the  former  category  or  grade  qualified  under  this  rule  is  available  for 
promotion.    A  member  temporarily  promoted  under  this  rule  shall  not  by  reason  only  of 
such  promotion,  be  regarded  as  a  probationer  in  the  category  or  grade  to  which  he  has 
been promoted, or be entitled to any preferential claim to future promotion. 

(b)

A probationer in a category carrying a lower rate of pay who is promoted
temporarily  under  sub-rule  (a)  to  a  category  carrying  a  higher  rate  of  pay  in  the  same 
service shall be entitled to count towards his probation in the former category the period of 
duty  performed  by  him  in  the  latter  category  during which he  would  have  held  a  post in 
the former category but for such temporary promotion. 

13. Special Qualifications.____ No person shall be eligible for appointment to any

service, class, category or grade or any post borne on the cadre thereof unless he,____

(a) possesses  such  special  qualifications  and  has  passed  such  special  tests  as

may be prescribed in that behalf in the Special Rules, or 

(b) possesses  such  other  qualifications  as  may  be  considered  to  be  equivalent  to

the said special qualifications or special tests ____

(i) by  the  Commission  in  cases  where  the  appointment  has  to  be  made  in

consultation with it; or 

(ii) by  the State Government  or  by  the  Appointing  Authority  with the  approval  of

the State Government, in other cases: 

in 

that 

Provided 

the  case  of 

the  different 
Departments/Offices  in  the  Kerala  Judicial  Ministerial  Subordinate  Service  and  in  the 
Kerala  Ministerial  Subordinate  Service  the  unified  tests  prescribed  in    G.O.(P)22/63/PD. 
dated  the  14  th  January  1963,  as  subsequently  amended  or  clarified  shall  be  applicable, 
until  the  Special  Rules  for  the  Kerala  Judicial  Ministerial  Subordinate  Service  or  the 
Kerala Ministerial Subordinate Service as the case may be come into force. 

the  Ministerial  Staff  of 

13A.  Special  and  Departmental  Tests.___Temporary 

exemption 

for 

promotion._____ (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Rule 13,_____

(a) Where  a  pass  in  a  special  or  departmental  test  is  prescribed  by  the  Special
Rules of a service for any category, grade or post therein or in any class thereof, a member 
of  a  service  belonging  to  any  of  the  Scheduled  Castes  or  Scheduled  Tribes  who  has  not 
passed the said test  but is otherwise qualified and suitable for appointment to such class, 
category, grade or post may be appointed thereto temporarily. 

(b) Where  a  pass  in  a  special  or  departmental  test  is  newly  prescribed  by  the
Special Rules of a service for any category, grade or post therein or in any class thereof, a 
member  of  a  service  who  has  not  passed  the  said  test  but  is  otherwise  qualified  and 
suitable for appointment to such class, category, grade or post may, within 2 years of the 
introduction of the test, be appointed thereto temporarily. 

(2) If  a  member  of  a  service  appointed  under  clause  (a)  of  sub-rule  (1)  does  not
pass  a  test  within  3  years  from  the  date  of  such  appointment  or  when  the  said  test  also 
involves  practical  training,  within  three  years  after  the  first  chance  to  undergo  such 
training  after  such  appointment,  or  if  a  member  of  service  appointed  under  clause  (b)  of 
sub-rule  (1)  does  not  pass  the  test  within  two  years  from  the  date  of  introduction  of  the 
said test or if the said test also involves practical training, within two years after the first 
chance to undergo such training after the introduction of the said test, he shall be reverted 
to the class, category, grade or post from which he was appointed and shall not again be 
eligible for appointment under clause (a) or (b) as the case may be, of sub-rule(1): 

Provided that the period of temporary exemption allowed under clause (b) of sub-
rule  (1)  shall  be  extended  by  3  years  in  the  case  of  a  person  belonging  to  any  of  the 
Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes.  

(3)

If  it  is  proposed  to  introduce  any  new  test  or  tests  of  a  higher  standard  the
passing  of  which  may  be  a  condition  precedent  for  benefits  like  increments,  promotion, 
completion  of  probation,  etc.,  such  test  or  tests  shall  be  introduced  only  subject  to  the 
following conditions, namely:- 

(i) double the ordinary permissible time shall be allowed to an allotted employee
for passing the test, in cases where tests of a higher standard are prescribed or  where no 
tests are prescribed in the parent State; 

(ii) notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (b) of rule 37-B, Part I, K.S.R
and Rule  21  of these Rules  penalties   for not passing the test,  such  as  denial  of  benefits 
like increments, promotion, etc., shall be held in abeyance till the expiry of the time given 
for  passing  the  prescribed  test  under  clause  (i)  and  the  officer  shall  continue  to  be  on 
probation  till  the  expiry  of  the  above  period,  if  he  has  not  passed  the  prescribed  test  by 
that  time.    If  a  member  of  the  service  promoted  under  this  clause  does  not  pass  the 
prescribed  test  within  the  time  given  under  clause(i),  he  shall  be  reverted  to  the  class, 
category,  grade  or  post  from  which  he  was  promoted  and  shall  not  again  be  eligible  for 
promotion under this clause; 

(iii) allotted employees of and above the age of 45 years shall not be required to

pass the tests and they shall be eligible for all benefits as if they had passed the tests. 

This  sub-rule  shall  be  deemed  to  have  come  into  force  with  effect  from  16  th 

March 1966.   

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), (2) and (3), the period of
exemption  shall,  if  necessary,  be  extended  taking  into  account  the  number  of  times  the 
prescribed  test  was  conducted  during  the  period  so  as  to  enable  the  members  of  the 
service to get at least two chances to appear for the test for each year of exemption.  

(4A).  Civil  Servants  of  the  Kerala  State  who  were  permitted  to  take  up  military 
service  during  the  emergency  and  were  allowed  to  retain  their  lien  in  their  civil  posts 
during  the  period  of  their  absence  on  military  service  as  per  the  orders  in  G.O.  (MS)  No. 
62/Public  dated  the  6  th  February  1963  shall  be  granted  temporary  exemption  from 

passing departmental tests as long as they are in military service and for a further period 
of 4 years from the date of rejoining in the civil posts on termination of the military service. 

(5) A  person  reverted  for  not  passing  the  tests  within  the  period  of  exemption
shall not, by reason only of the appointment within the period of exemption be entitled to 
any  preferential  claim  of  future  appointment  to  the  class,  category,  grade  or  post  as  the 
case may be, to which he has been so appointed: 

Provided that this rule shall not be applicable to tests prescribed for purposes of 
promotion  of the  executive  staff  below the  rank  of Sub-Inspectors  belonging  to  the  Police 
Department.   

Note.___  This  proviso  shall  be  deemed  to  have  come  into  force  with  effect  from  23  rd 

October 1962. 

13AA.        Notwithstanding    anything    contained  in  these  rules,  the  Government 
may,  by  order,  exempt  for  a  specified  period,  any  member  or  members,  belonging  to  a 
Scheduled  Caste  or  Scheduled  Tribe,  and  already  in  service,  from  passing  the  tests 
referred to in rule 13 or rule 13 A of the said Rules: 

Provided that this rule shall not be applicable to tests prescribed for purposes of 
promotion  of the  executive  staff  below the  rank  of Sub-Inspectors  belonging  to  the  Police 
Department. 

Note.____ This  proviso  shall  be  deemed  to  have  come  into  force  with  effect  from  13th  January 

1972. 

13AB.    The  orders  exempting  members  of  the  Scheduled  Castes  and  of  the 
Scheduled Tribes who were in service on the 13 th January 1972, issued under Rule 13AA 
shall be and shall be deemed always to have been applicable to members of the Scheduled 
Castes and of the Scheduled Tribes who entered service after the said date also. 

13 B.  Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  these  rules  or  in  the  Special 
Rules, persons in Government Service who attained the age of 50 years who have put in 25 
years  of  service  shall  be  eligible  for  permanent  exemption  from  passing  the  obligatory 
departmental tests, other than those prescribed as qualification in the Special Rules for all 
purposes such as promotion, appointment as full member of a service etc. 

Provided that persons belonging to Scheduled Castes and  Scheduled Tribes shall 

be eligible for the permanent exemption when they attain the age of 50 years: 

Provided  further  that  this  rule  shall  not  be  applicable  to  tests  prescribed  for 

purposes of promotion of executive staff belonging to the Police Department: 

Provided  also  that  Ex-servicemen  employees  of  the  Rajya  Sainik  Board 
Department  who  attain  the  age  of  45  years  and  who  have  successfully  completed 
probation shall be permanently exempted from passing the tests prescribed for promotion 
irrespective of the period of their service. 

Note.____

Military  Service  and  service  rendered  in  Aided  Schools,  Local  Bodies  and 
Universities,  Work  Establishment  Service  of  Full  Time  Work  Establishment 
employees absorbed into Government Service  or recruited by the  Public  Service 
Commission,  Private  College  Service  to  the  credit  of  teachers  of  Government 
Colleges, Palace Service to the credit of the former Palace Employees absorbed in 
the Government Service and service rendered in posts which do not require test 

qualification shall be counted for calculating the 25 years of service for granting 
such permanent exemption. 

Explanation.____  The    expression    ‘Palace    Employees’  shall    mean    persons  who  were 
employed  in  the  Travancore  Palace  or  in  cochin Palace and who were 
absorbed  in  Government Service  by  specific orders of Government and 
recorded as such in their Service Books. 

The  Provisions  in  this  rule  shall  be  deemed  to  have  come  into  force  with  effect 

from 

(i)
(ii)

the 16 th June 1963 for the proposes of drawl of increments; and
the 19 th of March 1968 for all other purposes:

Provided also that persons in Government service who attain the age of 50 years 
on  or  after  the  26  th  day  of  August  1981,  shall  be  eligible  for  permanent  exemption  from 
passing  the  obligatory  departmental  tests  other  than  those  prescribed  as  essential 
qualification in the Special Rules for all purposes such as promotion, appointment as full 
member of a service etc., irrespective of their total period of service. 

13 BB. 

The  provisions  in  rules  13A,  13AA  and  13B  of  these  Rules  shall  not 
apply  to  the  qualifying  course/training  prescribed  for  the  members  of  the  Kerala  Fire 
Service and the Kerala Fire Subordinate Service. 

14. Reservation of appointments._____ Where the Special Rules lay down that the
principle  of  reservation  of  appointments  shall  apply  to  any  service,  class  or  category,  or 
where  in  the  case  of  any  service,  class  or  category  for  which no Special Rules have  been 
issued, the  Government have  by  notification in the Gazette  declared  that  the  principle  of 
reservation  of  appointments  shall  apply  to  such  service,  class  or  category,  appointments 
by  direct  recruitment  to  such  service,  class  or  category  shall  be  made  on  the  following 
basis:_____

(a) The  unit  of  appointment  for  the  purpose  of  this  rule  shall  be  20,  of  which  2
shall  be  reserved  for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled  Tribes and  8  shall  be  reserved  for 
the Other Backward Classes and the remaining 10 shall be filled on the basis of merit: 

Provided that out of every five posts reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes,  one  shall  go  to  Scheduled  Tribe  candidate  and  the  remaining  four  shall  go  to 
Scheduled Caste candidates and in the absence of a candidate to fill up the post reserved 
for Scheduled Tribe candidates, it shall go to a Scheduled Caste candidates and vice versa. 

(b) The claims of members of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and  Other
backward  Classes  shall  also  be  considered  for  the  appointments  which  shall  be  filled  on 
the basis of merit and where a candidate belonging to a Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribe 
or Other Backward Class is selected on  the basis of merit, the number of posts reserved 
for  Scheduled  Castes,  Scheduled  Tribes  or  for  Other  Backward  Classes  as  the  case  may 
be, shall not in any way be affected. 

(c) Appointments  under  this rule  shall  be  made  in  the  order  of  rotation  specified

below in every cycle of 20 vacancies. 

1.
2.
3.

Open Competition
Other Backward Classes
Open Competition

4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
Open Competition
Other Backward Classes
Open Competition
Other Backward Classes
Open Competition
Other Backward Classes
Open Competition
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
Open Competition
Other Backward Classes
Open Competition
Other Backward Classes
Open Competition
Other Backward Classes
Open Competition
Other Backward Classes

Provided that the fourth turn in the third rotation and the twelfth turn in the fifth 
rotation  shall  go  to  Scheduled  Tribe  candidates  and  the  fourth  and  twelfth  turns  in  the 
first, second and fourth rotations, the twelfth turn in the third rotation and the fourth turn 
in  the  fifth  rotation  shall  go  to  Scheduled  Caste  candidates  and  in  the  absence  of  a 
candidate  for  appointment  against  the  turn  allotted  for  Scheduled  Tribe  candidates,  it 
shall go to a Scheduled Caste candidate and vice versa: 

 Provided that the Rule shall not apply in the following cases:____

(i) appointment  of  near  relatives  of  military  personnel  killed,  permanently  disabled  or
reported  to  be  missing  in  action,  and  near  relatives  of  Government  servants  dying  in 
harness,  if  they  are  or  have  been  wholly  dependent  on  such  military  personnel  or 
Government  servants,  as  the  case  may  be,  subject    to  the  condition  that  priority  in  the 
matter  of  appointment  shall  be  given  only  to  one  relation  in  the  case  of  each  such 
personnel or Government servant. 

(ii) appointment  of  disabled  Jawans  who  are  to  be  rehabilitated  on  completion  of  their

medical treatment. 

    Persons  referred  to  in  items  (i)  and  (ii)  above  shall  be  given  priority  in  the  matter  of 

appointment to Government service provided they possess the prescribed qualifications. 

Explanation._____ 

(1) 

In    the  case  of  military  personnel,  the  term  ''near  relatives” 
means the widows/wives, sons, daughters, sisters, brothers, 

father, mother  nieces, and nephews. 

(2)

In  the  case  of    Government    servants  the    term  ''near
relatives''  means  the  widows,  sons,  daughters,  sisters,
brothers, father and mother.

Note._____ 

This      amendment    shall  be  deemed  to  have  come  into  force  from  the  12th 
March,1970.  But 
the  appointments 
this  amendment  shall  not  affect 
already  made  under  G.O.  (Ms)  No.20/70/PD,  dated  the  21  st  January  1970 
and  appointments  which  may  be  made  under  the  said  G.O.  on  applications 
received by the Government  on or before the 8th March ,1973. 

to  be  selected  on  open  competition  basis,  that 

Provided also that in preparing the list of eligible candidates to be appointed under 
this  rule  applying  the  rotations  specified  above  in  every  cycle  of  20  vacancies,  the 
candidates  eligible 
is,  turns 
1,3,5,7,9,11,13,15,  17  and  19  shall  be  selected  first  and  then  the  candidates  for  the 
reservation turns, out of those available in the ranked list in the particular groups having 
regard  to  their  ranks.    In  finalising  the  select  list  any  candidate  of  the  same  community 
selected  on  open  competition  turns  if  found  to  be  below  in  the  order  of  the  candidates 
selected from the same community on the basis of reservation, for the fixation of ranks as 
per rule 27 of these rules, candidates of the same community obtaining higher marks shall 
be interchanged with the candidates of the same community in the reservation turn for the 
purpose of ranking. 

Note.__  This  amendment  shall  be  deemed  to  have  come  into  force  with  effect  from  17th 

December 1958 

(d) Notwithstanding anything contained in this rule, posts to which, appointments
are  made  by  direct  recruitment  from  a  common  ranked  list  prepared  on  the  basis  of  a 
common  test  or  interview  or  both,  shall  be  grouped  together  for  the  purposes  of 
observance of the rules relating to reservation of appointments. 

[e)  A  supplementary  list  of  sufficient  number  of  suitable  candidates,  not  less  than 
five  times  the  reservation  quota,  if  available,  from  each  community  or  group  of 
communities  for  the  purpose  of  satisfying  the  reservation  quota,  shall  be  prepared  and 
published. 

Note. ____

'Suitable  candidates'  for  the  purpose  of  this  rule  shall  mean  candidates  with 
notified minimum qualifications and marks in selection procedure lowered to the 
extent necessary. 

(f) A provisional appointment chart, at the time of each advice, showing separately
the candidates eligible  to be  selected on open  competition basis and candidate eligible to 
be  selected  on  reservation  turns  including  details  of  non-joining  duty,no  candidates 
available  vacancies,  and  forfeited  reservation  turn  vacancies  pending,  if  any,  to  be 
compensated shall be published: 

Provided  that  a  final  appointment  chart  shall  be  published  at  the  end  of  the 
selection year showing the candidates selected on open competition basis and selected on 
reservation quota. 

Note._____ 

 'Appointment chart' for the  purpose of this rule shall mean the list showing 

the details of candidates advised based on merit and another list of    
candidates advised based on reservation showing their community, group 
of communities, turn, vacancy details, such as non-joining duty, no    
candidate available, temporarily passed over, etc. 

15. (a)  The integrated cycle combining the rotation in clause (c) of rule 14 and the
sub-rotation in sub- rule (2) of rule 17 shall be as specified in the Annexure to this Part. 
Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  any  other  provisions  of  these  rules  or  in    the 
Special  Rules  if  a  suitable  candidate  is  not  available  for  selection  from  any  particular 
community or group of communities specified in the Annexure, such vacancy shall be kept 
unfilled, notified separately for that community or group of communities for that selection 
year  and  shall  be  filled  by  direct  recruitment  exclusively  from  among  that  community  or 
group  of  communities.    If  after  re-notification,  repeatedly  for  not  less  than  two  times,  no 
suitable  candidate  is  available  for  selection  from  the  respective  community  or  group  of 
communities,  the  selection    shall  be  made  from  available  Other  Backward  Classes 

candidates.  In the absence of Other Backward Classes candidates, the selection shall be 
made from available Scheduled Castes candidates and in their absence, the selection shall 
be made from available Scheduled Tribes candidates. 

Explanation.____ 

One 'selection year' for the purpose of this rule shall be the 

period from the date on which the rank list of candidates comes 

into force to the date on which it expires. 

Note.___

All pending uncompensated turns of vacancies such as temporarily passed 

over, no candidate available and non-joining duty as on the 2nd February, 
2006, shall be compensated.  

(b)

If a suitable candidate is not available for selection from the group of communities
classified as 'Scheduled Castes' in the turn allotted from such group in the Annexure,the 
said group shall be passed over and the post shall be filled up by a suitable candidate from 
the group of communities classified "Scheduled Tribes" and vice-versa. 

(c) The  benefit  of  the  turn  forfeited  to  Scheduled  Castes  or  Scheduled  Tribes
communities by reason of it being passed over under sub-rule(b) shall be restored to it, at 
the earliest possible opportunity, if a suitable candidate from that particular community or 
group is available for selection by making adjustment against the claims of the Scheduled 
Caste  or  Scheduled  Tribe  community  that  derived    the  extra  benefit  by  reason  of  such 
passing over. 

(d) Reservation to a category of posts shall not exceed  50 % of the total number of

vacancies for which selection is resorted to in a selection year: 

Provided that the 50 % ceiling to reservation specified above shall not apply to the 
filling up of any number of reserved vacancies kept unfilled and notified separately as per 
sub-rule  (a)  of  Rule  15  to  be  filled  exclusively  by  direct  recruitment  from  among  a 
community or group of communities: 

Provided further that such class of vacancies to be filled up in that year or in any 
succeeding year or years shall not be considered together with the vacancies of the year in 
which  they  are  being  filled  up  for  determining  the  ceiling  of  50  %  of  the  total  number  of 
vacancies of that year. 

16. There shall be sub-rotation among major groups of Other Backward Classes.

17.

(1) The grouping of Other Backward Classes for the above purpose shall be

as indicated below:- 

1. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
2. Muslims
3. Latin Catholics and Anglo Indians
4. Hindu Nadars
4A.(Nadars included in S.I. U.C.
5. Scheduled Caste Converts to Christianity
6. Viswakarmas
7. Dheevaras
8. Other  Backward  Classes  put  together i.e.,  communities  other    than
those  mentioned  in items  1 to 7 above  included in the list of  "Other
Backward Classes".

(2) (a) The 40% reservation allowed to Other Backward Classes shall be distributed

among the different groups of Backward Classes in the following proportion:- 

(i) For direct recruitment to posts included in the Kerala Last Grade Service.

    Out of every 40 appointments, 11 shall be given to Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas, 10 
to Muslims, 4 to Latin Catholics and Anglo Indians, 1 to Hindu Nadars and 2 to  Nadars 
included in S.I.U.C 2 to Scheduled Caste Converts to Christianity, 2 to Viswakarmas, 2 to 
Dheevaras and 6 to Other Backward Classes put together. 

(ii) For  direct  recruitment  to  posts  other  than  those  included  in  the  Kerala  Last

Grade Service. 

  Out of every 40 appointments, 14 shall be given to Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas, 
12  to  Muslims,  4  to  Latin  Catholics  and  Anglo  Indians,  1  to  Hindu  Nadars  and  1  to 
Nadars  included  in  S.I.U.C.,  1  to  Scheduled  Caste  Converts  to  Christianity,  3  to 
Viswakarmas, 1 to Dheevaras and 3 to Other Backward Classes put together. 

(b) The following shall be the rotation by which posts reserved for Other Backward

Classes will be distributed among the various groups coming under the class:- 

(i) For direct recruitment to posts included in the Kerala Last Grade Service,____

1. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
2. Muslims
3. Latin Catholics and Anglo Indians
4. Other Backward Classes
5. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
6. Muslims
7. Dheevaras
8. Viswakarmas
9. Latin Catholics and Anglo Indians
10. Muslims
11. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
12. Other Backward Classes
13. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
14. Muslims
15. Nadars  included in S.I.U.C
16. Other Backward Classes
17. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
18. Muslims
19. Scheduled Caste Converts to Christianity
20. Other Backward Classes
21. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
22. Muslims
23. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
24. Hindu Nadars
25. Scheduled Caste Converts to Christianity
26. Muslims
27. Latin Catholics and Anglo-Indians
28. Other Backward Classes
29. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
30. Muslims
31. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
32. Nadars included in S.I.U.C

33. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
34. Muslims
35. Dheevaras
36. Other Backwards Classes
37. Latin Catholics and Anglo-Indians
38. Muslims
39. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
40. Viswakarmas

Explanation._____  The  expression  "Other  Backward  Classes"  referred  to  in  items  4, 
12,16,20 28 and 36 shall mean Backward Classes referred to in item 
8 under sub- rule (1) of this Rule. 

(ii) For direct recruitment to posts other than those included in the Kerala Last Grade

Service. 

1. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
2. Muslims
3. Latin Catholics and Anglo Indians
4. Other Backward Classes
5. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
6. Muslims
7. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
8. Viswakarmas
9. Latin Catholics and Anglo Indians
10. Muslims
11. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
12. Muslims
13. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
14. Muslims
15. Nadars  included in S.I.U.C
16. Other Backward Classes
17. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
18. Muslims
19. Scheduled Caste Converts to Christianity
20. Dheevaras
21. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
22. Muslims
23. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
24. Hindu Nadars
25. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
26. Muslims
27. Latin Catholics and Anglo-Indians
28. Viswakarmas
29. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
30. Muslims
31. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
32. Muslims
33. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
34. Muslims
35. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
36. Other Backwards Classes
37. Latin Catholics and Anglo-Indians
38. Muslims
39. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas

40. Viswakarmas

Explanation._____  The  expression  "Other  Backward  Classes"  referred  to  in  items  4,  16 
and 36 shall mean Backward Classes referred to in item 8 under sub- 
rule(1) of this Rule. 

17  A.  Special  Recruitment  from  among  the  Scheduled  Castes  and  Scheduled 
Tribes._____ Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules or in the Special Rules, the 
State Government may reserve a specified number of posts in any service, class, category 
or  grade  to  be  filled  by  direct  recruitment  exclusively  from  among  the  members  of 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 

This Rule shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 25.11.1959. 

17B. Notwithstanding anything contained in rule 10 (c) or in any Special Rules, the 
age limit for Special Recruitment from among the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
under rule 17A, to the posts in the various Departments shall be such, as may be fixed by 
Government, either by executive order or by Special Rules from time to time. 

17C.  The  candidate  claiming  the  benefit  of  age  relaxation/reservation  in 
appointments/special  recruitments  by  virtue  of  being  a  member  of  the  Back  ward 
Classes/Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes as provided for in sub-rules (c), (d) and (dd) 
of  rule  10,  rule  14,  rule  17A  and  rule  17B  ibid  shall  produce  to  the  satisfaction  of  the 
Kerala Public Service Commission, certificates/ relevant documents as required by them, 
to prove the claim in the application and in any case, before the finalization of the ranked 
list for the post concerned. 

18.

(a)  Date  of  commencement  of  probation  of  persons  first  appointed
temporarily._____If a person, having been appointed temporarily under sub- rule (a) or sub-
rule  (c)  of rule  9  to  a  post  borne  on  the  cadre  of any  service,  class  or  category  otherwise 
than  in  accordance  with  the  rules  governing  appointment  thereto,  is  subsequently 
appointed  to  the  service,  class  or  category  in  accordance  with  the  rules,  he  shall 
commence  his  probation  from  the  date  of  such  subsequent  appointment  or  from  such 
earlier  date  as  the  appointing  authority  may  determine,  without  prejudice  to  seniority  of 
others  

(b) Service  in  a  different  service  counting  for  probation._____  A  probationer  in  a
service or class or category of a service shall be eligible to count for probation, his service, 
if  any,  performed  otherwise  than  in  a  substantive  capacity  on  regular  appointment  to 
another  service  in  accordance  with  the  rules  if  the  normal  method  of  recruitment  to  the 
latter service is according to the rules, by transfer from the former service or the class or 
category thereof, as the case may be or, if the duties and responsibilities attaching to the 
latter service, or the class or category thereof have been declared by the State Government 
to  be  of  equal  or  greater  importance  than those  attaching to the  post from  which he has 
been transferred. 

(c) Service  in  a  higher  category  counting  for  probation.____  A  probationer  in  any
category or a service or class of service shall be eligible to count for probation, his service, 
if  any,  performed  otherwise  than  in  a  substantive  capacity  on  regular  appointment  to  a 
higher category of the same service or class of service, as the case may be. 

    Nothing contained in this sub- rule shall be construed as authorising the promotion 

of a probationer in a category to a higher category in contravention of rule 28. 

(d) Temporary service counting for probation.____A probationer in one service who
is  appointed  temporarily  to  another  service,  Subordinate  or  State,  under  sub-rule  (a)  or 
sub- rule (c) of Rule 9 shall be entitled to count towards his probation in the former service 
the period of duty performed by him in the latter service during which he would have held 
a post in the former service but for such temporary appointment. 

(e) Service  on  temporary  promotion  counting  for  probation.____  A  probationer  in
any category of a service who is promoted temporarily under the provisions of Rule 31 to a 
higher category in the same service shall be entitled to count towards his probation, if any, 
in  the  former  category  the  period  of  duty  performed  by  him  in  the  latter  category  during 
which he would have held a post in the former category but for such temporary promotion. 

(f) A member of a service or class or category of a service deputed in public interest
to  discharge  the  duties  of  another  post  shall  be  eligible  to  count  the  period  of  such 
deputation for probation in the service or class or category of the service in which he was a 
probationer  at  the  time  of  his  deputation  or  would  have  been  a  probationer  but  for  his 
deputation. 

(g) A probationer who before completing probation in the service, class or category
to which he is first appointed proceeds on leave without allowance granted and availed of 
as  per  Appendix XII A,  Appendix XII B  or  Appendix XII C  of  Part I of the  Kerala Services 
Rules shall commence probation afresh on his return from such leave. 

(h) A  person who  got  appointment  in  one Department  of a  service from  a  common
selective list prepared by the Commission and thereafter discharged from that department 
for want of vacancy and got reappointed on re-registering his name with the Public Service 
Commission, shall be entitled to count his service in the former Department for probation 
in the latter Department. 

(i) An  inter-departmental  transferee  shall  have  to  undergo  probation  in  the  new
department  in  accordance  with  the  Special  Rules.  In  the  case  of  inter-departmental 
transfer to the services for which Special Rules have not been issued, the transferee shall 
not  be  allowed  to  count  his  service  in  the  former  service  or  unit  for  the  purposes  of 
probation  in  the  new  department  and  in  such  cases  the  inter-departmental  transferee 
shall be on probation for a total period of two years on duty in the new Department within 
a continuous period of three years. 

19. Suspension,  termination  or  extension  of  probation.____    (a)  Where  the
Special  Rules  of  any  service  prescribe  a  period  of  probation  for  appointment  as  a  full 
member  of  the  service  or  where  such  period  of  probation  has  been  extended  under 
General  Rule  21,  the  Appointing  Authority  may,  at  any  time  before  the  expiry  of  the 
prescribed period of probation or the extended period of probation, as the  case may be- 

(i)

(ii)

suspend the probation of a probationer and discharge him for want of vacancy,
or

at its discretion, by order, either, terminate the probation of a  probationer and
discharge  him  or  in  case  the  probation  has  not  been  extended  under  General
Rule  21  extend  the  period  of  his  probation,  after  giving  him  a  reasonable
opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard
to him:

Provided  that  where  a  probationer  has  been  given  a  reasonable  opportunity  of 
showing cause against the imposition on him of any of the penalties specified in items (iv), 
(vii),  (viii)  and  (ix)  of  Rule  11  of  the  Kerala  Civil  Services  (Classification,  Control  and 
Appeal) Rules and at the conclusion of the disciplinary proceedings, a tentative conclusion 
is arrived at to terminate his probation, a further opportunity of showing cause specifically 
against termination of his probation need not be given to him. 

Explanation.-   An opportunity to show cause may be given after the Appointing Authority 
arrives  at  a  provisional  conclusion  on  the  suitability  or  otherwise  of  the 
probationer  for  full  membership  of  the  service,  either  by  such  authority 
himself  or  by  a  subordinate  authority  who  is  superior  in  rank  to  the 
probationer. 

(b) (i)  If  within  the  period    of  probation  a  probationer  fails    to  acquire  the  special
qualifications  or  to  pass  the  special  tests,  if  any,  prescribed  in  the  Special  Rules,  or  to 
acquire  such  other  qualifications  as  may  be  declared  by  the  State  Government  or  by  the 
Appointing  Authority  with  the  approval    of  the  State  Government  to  be  equivalent  to  the 
said  special  qualifications  or  special  tests,  the  Appointing  Authority  shall,  by  order, 
discharge him  unless the period of probation is extended under rule 21. 

(ii)

If within the period of probation prescribed in the Special Rules, for the service
or  within  the  extended  period  of  probation,  as  the  case  may  be,  the  probationer  has 
appeared for any such tests or for any examinations in connection with the acquisition of 
any  such  qualifications  and  the  results  of  the  tests  or  examinations  for  which  he  has  so 
appeared  are  not  known  before  the  expiry  of  such  period,  he  shall  continue  to  be  on 
probation until the publication of the results of the tests or examinations for which he has 
appeared or the first of them in which he fails to pass, as the case may be.  

In case the probationer fails to pass any of the tests or examinations for which he 

has so appeared, the appointing authority shall by order discharge him. 

Provided  that  where  a  probationer  has  appeared  for  any  tests  or  examinations 
within  the  period  of  probation  prescribed  in  connection  with  the  acquisition  of  any  such 
qualifications and the results of the tests or examinations for which he has appeared and 
passed  are  known  only  after the  expiry  of  the  prescribed  period  of  probation, he shall  be 
deemed  to  have  satisfactorily  completed  his  probation  on  the  date  on  which  he  has 
completed the prescribed period of probation. 

Note. ____ 

(1)

(2)

This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force
with effect from 17 th December 1958.
Cases already settled or disposed of prior to the issue of this
amendment shall not be reopened.

20.

Probationer's  suitability  for  full  membership.____    (a)  At  the  end  of  the
prescribed or extended period of probation, as the case may be, the Appointing Authority 
shall  consider  the  probationer's  suitability  for  full  membership  of  the  service,  class  or 
category for which he was selected: 

Provided  that  in  case  the  probation  was  extended  under  rule  21,  solely  to  enable 
the  probationer  to  acquire  the  special  qualifications  or  to  pass  the  prescribed  tests,  the 
Appointing Authority shall consider the probationers suitability for full membership of the 
service,  class  or  category  as  soon  as  the  probationer  has  acquired  the  special 
qualifications or has passed the prescribed tests.    

 
(b) If  the  Appointing  Authority  decides  that  a  probationer  is  suitable  for  such
membership, it shall as soon as possible issue an order declaring the probationer to have 
satisfactorily completed  his  probation.   On  the  issue  of such  order,  the  probationer  shall 
be  deemed  to  have  satisfactorily  completed his  probation  on the  date  of the  expiry  of the 
prescribed or extended period of probation: 

Provided that in cases to which the proviso to sub-rule (a) applies the probationer 
shall be deemed to have satisfactorily completed his probation on the day following the last 
date  of  the  whole  examination  or  test  in  which  the  probationer  has  acquired  the  special 
qualification or has passed the prescribed tests by passing one more subjects, if such date 
is earlier than the date of expiry of the extended period of probation. 

Note._  Where  a  person  can  choose  between  two  examinations  or  tests  or  corresponding 
subjects/papers of two examinations or tests and where the two examinations or tests 
conducted  during  the  same  period  end  on  two  different  dates,  the  benefit  of  passing 
the examination or test shall be deemed to have accrued on the day following the last 
date of the whole examination or test which ends on the later date. 

(c) If the Appointing Authority decides that the probationer is not suitable for such
membership,  it  shall  unless  the  period  of  probation  is  extended  under  Rule  21  by  order 
discharge  him  after  giving  him  a  reasonable  opportunity  of  showing  cause  against  the 
action proposed to be taken in regard to him:  

    Provided that where a probationer has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing 
cause against the imposition on him of any of the penalties specified in items (iv), (vii), (viii) 
and  (ix)  of  Rule  11  of  the  Kerala  Civil  Services  (Classification,  Control  and  Appeal)  Rules 
and at the conclusion of the disciplinary proceedings, a tentative conclusion is arrived at 
to  discharge  him  a  further  opportunity  of  showing  cause  specifically  against  such 
discharge need not be given to him. 

Explanation I.__

The decision  of the Appointing Authority that the probationer is not 
suitable    for    full    membership    may  be  based  also  on his work  and 
conduct    till  the  date  of    the  decision    inclusive  of  the  period 
subsequent to the prescribed or extended period of probation. 

Explanation II.__  An opportunity to show cause may be given after the appointing 

authority arrives at a provisional  conclusion on the suitability or 
otherwise of the probationer for full membership of the service, 
either by such authority himself or by a subordinate authority who    
is superior in rank to the probationer. 

20  A.  Delay  in  the  order  of  probation.-  Any  delay  in  the  issue  of  an  order 
discharging a probationer under clause (ii) of sub- rule (a) of rule 19, or clause (i) or (ii) of 
sub-rule (b)  of that   rule  or  sub-rule  (c)  of  rule 20,  shall not  entitle him to  be  deemed  to 
have satisfactorily completed his probation. 

21. Extension  of  probation.____  In the  case  of  any  probationer falling  under sub-
rule  (b)  of  rule  19  or  sub-rule  (c)  of  rule  20,  the  Appointing  Authority  may  extend  his 
probation for a maximum period of one year to enable him to acquire special qualifications 
or pass the prescribed tests, as the case may be, or to enable the appointing authority to 
decide  whether  the    probationer  is  suitable  for  full  membership  or  not.    Extension  of 
probation  beyond  one  year  may,  however,  be  ordered  by  Government  if  found  necessary. 

In cases where the probation of a probationer is extended  a condition shall, unless there 
are special reasons to the contrary, be attached to the order of extension of probation that 
the  probationer's  increment  shall  be  stopped  until  he  is  declared  to  have  satisfactorily 
completed his probation.  Such stoppage of increment shall not be treated as a penalty but 
only  as  a  condition  of  extension  of  probation  and  shall  not  have  the  effect  of  postponing 
future increments after he has passed  the prescribed tests or examinations or after he is 
declared to have satisfactorily completed his probation. 

22. Exercise of certain powers of Appointing Authority by higher authorities.____
The powers conferred on the Appointing Authority, other than the State Government, may 
be  exercised  also  by  any  higher  authority  to  whom  the  appointing  authority  is 
administratively subordinate whether directly or indirectly, in the following cases:____

(1) Termination of probation of a probationer under Rule 19 (a) (ii).

(2) Discharge of a probationer under Rule 20 (c).

(3) Extension of probation under rule 19 (a) (ii) or rule 21.

23. Appeal against discharge.____ (a) A probationer who is discharged under clause
(ii) of  sub-  rule  (a)  of  rule  19  or  under  sub- rule  (c)  of rule  20  shall be  entitled  to  appeal
against the order of discharge passed by the competent authority to the authority to which
and  within  the  period  of  limitation  within  which  an  appeal  would  lie  against  an  order  of
dismissal passed by the competent authority against a full member of his service, class or
category, as the case may be:

Provided that in the case of a probationer in a State Service who is discharged from 
service  by  an  authority  subordinate  to  the  State  Government,  an  appeal  shall  lie  to  the 
State Government. 

(b) The authority competent to entertain an appeal under sub- rule (a) may, either
of its own motion or otherwise, revise any order discharging a probationer under any of the 
provisions referred to in the said sub-rule within one year of the date of such order. 

(c) (i) When an  order  discharging a  probationer is set aside on appeal under sub-
rule (a) or on revision under sub- rule (b) and the probationer is restored to the service, the 
period  on  and  from  the  date  of  discharge  to  the  date  of  such  restoration  may,  with  the 
previous  sanction  of  the  State  Government,  be  treated  as  on  duty  except  for  purposes  of 
probation,  the  period  of  probation  undergone  by  such  probationer  at  the  time  of  his 
discharge  shall,  however,  count  towards  the  period  of  probation  prescribed  by  the  rules 
applicable to him. 

(ii) Such probationer may, during the period on and from the date of his discharge to
the  date  of  his  restoration,  be  paid  such  pay  and  allowances  not  exceeding  the  pay  and 
allowances  to  which  he  would  have  been  entitled  if  he  had  not  been  discharged,  as  the 
authority  passing  the  orders  under  sub-rule  (a)  or (b) may, with the  previous sanction  of 
the State Government, determine. 

24. Appointment  of  full  members.____  (a)  Subject  to  the  provisions  of  rule  8  an
approved probationer shall be appointed to be a full member of the service in the class or 
category for which he was selected, at the earliest possible opportunity, in any substantive 
vacancy which may exist or arise in the permanent cadre of such class or category and if 
such  vacancy  existed  from  a  date  previous  to  the  issue  of  the  order  of  appointment,  he 
may be so appointed with retrospective effect from the  date or, as the case may be, from 

any subsequent date from which he was continuously on duty as a member of the service 
in such class or category or in a higher class or category: 

Provided  that  where  more  than  one  approved  probationer  is  available  for  such 
appointment  as  full  member,  the  senior  most  approved  probationer  on  the  date  of  the 
vacancy shall be appointed: 

Provided  further  that  notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  this  sub-rule,  a 
candidate who is recruited direct to a post in any service, class, category or grade reserved 
for  members  of Scheduled  Castes  and Scheduled  Tribes shall,  on satisfactory completion 
of probation, be appointed to any substantive vacancy which may exist in the permanent 
cadre  of  such  service,  class,  category  or  grade,  or  if  no  such  vacancy  exists,  to  the  first 
such vacancy which may arise after the satisfactory completion of probation. 

Explanation.____ 

For  the  purposes  of this  sub-  rule  an  approved  probationer  on leave 
shall be deemed to be on duty as a member of the service in the class 
or category concerned if he would have been on duty in such class or 
category or in a higher class or category but for his absence on leave. 

(b) Where  appointment  to  any  service,  class  or  category  is  according  to  rules
normally  both  by  direct  recruitment  and  by  transfer,  vacancies  against  which  persons 
have been recruited direct shall be regarded as a distinct group, while all other vacancies 
shall  be  regarded  as  another  distinct  group,  and  appointment  of  full  members  in 
accordance with sub- rule (a) shall be made separately in each of these groups. 

25.

Appointment  as  full  member,  discharge  and  re-appointment  of  members
who are not probationers or approved probationers.____ In regard to persons appointed to 
any class or category of a service by promotion in respect of whom the Special Rules of the 
service do not prescribe a period of probation in the class or category to which they have 
been  promoted,  rule  6,7  and  24  of  this  Part  shall  be  construed  as  if  'Probation'  and 
'probationer'  or  'approved  probationer'  meant  'officiating  service'  and  'person  officiating' 
respectively. 

26.

Membership of more than one service.____ No person shall at the same time

be a full member of more than one service. 

A probationer, approved probationer or full member of one service who is appointed 

to be a full member of another service shall cease to be member of the former service. 

27.

Seniority.____  (a)  Seniority  of  a  person  in  a  service,  class,  category  or  grade
shall, unless he has  been  reduced  to a  lower rank  as  punishment,  be  determined  by  the 
date of the order of his first appointment to such service, class, category or grade. 

Explanation.____

For the purposes of  this sub-rule, "appointment"  shall not include 

appointment under rule 9 or appointment by promotion under Rule 

31. 

This  amendment  shall be  deemed  to  have  come  into force  with  effect  on and from 
the  17  th  December,  1958,  but  shall  not  affect  the  seniority  of  any  member  of  a  service 
settled prior to the date of publication of this amendment in the Gazette: 

Provided  that  the  seniority  of  persons  on  mutual  or  inter-unit  or  inter- 
departmental transfer from one Unit to another within the same Department or from one 
Department  to  another,  as  the  case  may  be,  on  requests  from  such  persons  shall  be 

determined with reference to the dates of their joining duty in the new Unit or Department. 
In the case of more than one person joining duty  in the same grade in the same Unit or 
Department  on the same date, seniority shall be determined, _____

(a)

(b)

if  the  persons  who  join  duty  belong  to  different  units  or  different  departments,
with reference to their age, the older being considered as senior, and
if  the  persons  who  join  duty  belong  to  the  same  category  of  post  in  the  same
department,  in  accordance  with  their  seniority  in  the  Unit  or  Department  from
which they were transferred

Note.____ 

(i)

(ii)

shall  be  deemed  to  have  come  into  force  with 

This  amendment
effect from 28-12-1960.
Cases already settled or disposed of prior to the issue of this amendment
shall not be re-opened:

    Provided  further  that  the  seniority  of  persons  advised  for  appointment  to  the  same 
category  of  post  in  a  Department  on  the  same  date  by  different  District  Offices/  District 
Units  of  the  Public  Service  Commission  and  the  seniority  of  persons  advised  for 
appointment  to  different  posts  which  constituted  feeder  categories  of  higher  posts  in  a 
Department  on  the  same  date  by  the  Public  Service  Commission  shall  be  decided  as 
follows:- 

(i)

(ii)

When  not  more  than  one  person  is  advised  for  appointment  from  each
District,  on  the  basis  of  their  age,  the  older  being  declared  senior  to  the
younger.

When    more    than  one  person  is    advised  for  appointment  the  persons
having  the same serial  number in the various advice  lists  shall be grouped
together separately and the inter-se- seniority  in  each  group shall  be fixed
on the basis of their age, the older being declared senior to the younger.

Note.__  While  determining  seniority  under  this  proviso,  if  the  date  of  birth  of  two  or    more 
persons  happens  to  be  the  same,  their  seniority  shall  be  fixed  on  the  basis  of  the 
alphabetical  order  of  their  names  and  if  the  date  of    birth  and  the  names  of  two  or 
more persons happen to be the same, their seniority shall be fixed on the basis of the 
alphabetical order of the Districts concerned as below:- 

(1) Alappuzha
(2) Ernakulam
(3) Idukki
(4) Kannur
(5) Kasaragode
(6) Kollam
(7) Kottayam

(8) Kozhikode
(9) Malappuram
(10) Palakkad
(11) Pathanamthitta
(12) Thiruvananthapuram
(13) Thrissur
(14) Wayanad

Provided also that the seniority of persons advised for appointment to a category of 
post in  a Department,  where  the  methods  of appointment  to that  post  are  by  promotion, 
by transfer and by direct recruitment in a fixed ratio or percentage, shall be determined as 
illustrated below:- 

Where  the  first  vacancy  in  a  category  is  for  appointment  by  promotion  or  transfer 
and  the  second  vacancy  is  for  appointment  by  direct  recruitment  and  when  the  first  two 
vacancies  arise  in  that  category  a  departmental  hand  shall  be  appointed  regularly  by 
promotion  or  transfer,  as  the  case  may  be,  in  the  first  vacancy  and  in  the  absence  of  a 

direct  recruit  reporting  for  duty  in  the  second  vacancy  a  departmental  hand  shall  be 
appointed temporarily by promotion or transfer, as the case may be, in that vacancy.  In 
case a direct recruit does not report for duty till a third vacancy arises in the Department, 
the  appointment  of  person  temporarily  by  promotion  or  transfer  in  the  second  vacancy 
shall be regularized from the date of occurrence of the third vacancy.  Similarly if two more 
vacancies  arise  in  that  cadre  (totally  five)  the  departmental  hands  are  entitled  for  three 
vacancies and hence the promotion or transfer of the third man shall be regularized from 
the date of occurrence of the fifth vacancy.  The direct recruit shall be entitled for rank and 
seniority from the date of his first effective advice: 

Provided  also  that  the  seniority  of  a  person  advised  by  the  District  Office  of  the 
Public  Service  Commission  for  appointment  in  the  vacancy  in  the  Headquarters,  without 
obtaining  his  willingness  and  transferred  after  such  appointment  to  the  district  of  his 
choice without insisting on the time limit of five years, shall be determined with reference 
to the date of his original advice by the District Office of the Public Service Commission. 

Note.____

The above proviso shall not apply to inter-unit or inter-departmental transfers. 

(b) The Appointing Authority shall, at the time of passing an order appointing two or
more  persons  simultaneously  to  a  service,  fix  the  order  of  preference  among  them;  and 
seniority shall be determined in accordance with it: 

Provided  that nothing contained in  sub-rules  (a) and (b)  above  shall  be  deemed  to 
have  superseded  the  orders  of  the  Travancore-Cochin  Government  in  R.  Dis  No. 
8207/50/CS dated 7th May 1951 as subsequently clarified in respect  of  any person who 
was a member of any service on the date of coming into force of these Rules: 

 Provided  further  that  the  above  said  order  of  the  Travancore-Cochin  Government 
as subsequently clarified shall also be applicable to the persons appointed in the State of 
Kerala before the coming into force of these Rules. 

This  amendment  shall be  deemed  to  have  come  into force  with  effect  on and from 

17-12-1958:

Provided also that persons referred to in the foregoing provisos shall be entitled to 
restoration  of  seniority  in  accordance  with  the  orders  of  the  Travancore-Cochin 
Government  referred  to  therein  as  subsequently  clarified  over  those  who  have  been 
appointed in the State of Kerala on or after the 17th day of December, 1958. 

The  amendment  hereby  made  shall  be  deemed  to  have  come  into  force  with  effect 

on and from the 17 th December 1958. 

(c)

Notwithstanding    anything    contained    in    clauses (a)    and    (b)    above,  the
seniority of a person appointed to a class, category or grade in a service on the advice of 
the  Commission  shall,  unless  he  has  been  reduced  to  a  lower  rank  as  punishment,  be 
determined  by  the  date  of  first  effective  advice  made  for  his  appointment  to  such  class, 
category  or  grade  and  when  two  or  more  persons  are  included  in  the  same  list  of 
candidates advised, their relatives seniority shall be fixed according to the order in which 
their names are arranged in the advice list: 

Provided that the seniority of candidates who have been granted extension of time 
to  join  duty  beyond  three  months  from  the  date  of  the  appointment  order,  except  those 
who  are  undergoing  courses  of  study  or  training  which  are  prescribed  as  essential 
qualification for the  post to which  they  are  advised for appointment, shall  be  determined 
by the date of their joining duty: 

Provided further that the seniority of the persons appointed,- 

(a) directly under the Compassionate Employment Scheme,

(b) through regularization of temporary or provisional hands, such as;

(i)
(ii)
(iii)

persons belonging to Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribes;
physically handicapped persons; and
others,

to the 3% of Class III and IV posts reserved for appointment by

(c)
physically handicapped persons through any other source than the Kerala
Public  Service Commission.

(d)

to the sports quota.

(e)

through  any  other  source  other  than  recruitment  through  Kerala  Public
Service Commission shall be determined as per sub-rule (a) and (b) as above.  As between 
persons appointed to the same category by the appointing Authority, on the advice of the 
Public Service  Commission under  the  normal  method  and  persons  appointed  by  any  one 
or  more  of  the  methods  shown  above,  the  former  shall  be  treated  as  senior  to  the  latter 
subject  to  the  provisions  in  the  first  proviso,  if  the  date  of  effective  advice  of  the 
Commission  for  the  appointment  happens  to  be  the  same  date  or  any  other  date  earlier 
than the date of appointment of the latter.  The seniority of persons appointed, otherwise 
than  through  the  Kerala  Public  Service  Commission,  directly  under  any  one  of  the 
methods mentioned above, to the same category, by the same Appointment Authority, but 
on different dates in a Unit/Department, shall be reckoned with reference to  the date of 
former appointment order issued by the concerned Appointing Authority.  If more than one 
person are allowed to be appointed directly by means of Government Order otherwise than 
through  Kerala  Public  Service  Commission,  under  any  one  or  more  of  the  methods 
mentioned above  and are appointed to the same category, on the same date by the same 
Appointing  Authority  in  a  Unit/Department,  than  their  seniority  shall  be  reckoned  with 
reference  to  their  age,  the  older  being  reckoned  senior  to  the  younger.    While  fixing 
seniority  by  applying  the  above  principle,  if  the  dates  of  birth  of  more  than  one  person 
happen to be the same, their seniority shall be fixed on the basis of the alphabetical order 
of their names. When issuing the formal appointment orders in such cases, the Appointing 
Authority  shall    determine  the seniority  and  the  order  of  precedence  of the candidates to 
be  appointed,  using  the  aforementioned  criteria  and  the  same  shall  be  specified  in  the 
appointement orders. 

Provided  also  that  where  the  date  of  effective  advice  in  respect  of  a  person 
appointed otherwise than in pursuance of rule 17A and a person appointed in pursuance 
of  rule  17A  is the  same,  the  former  shall  subject  to  the  provisions in the  first  proviso  be 
treated as senior to the latter: 

Provided also that the seniority of a person appointed in one service from a common 
selective list, prepared by the Commission and thereafter discharged from service for want 
of  vacancy  and  got  reappointed  in  another  service  or  another  Department/Institution  on 
further advice of the Commission, shall be determined by the date of first effective advice: 

Provided also that in case where the date of joining duty of a person appointed on 
mutual  or  inter-unit  of  inter-departmental  transfer  to  a  post  on  request  and  the  date  of 
first effective advice of a person appointed to the same category of post on the advice of the 

Commission are  the same, the latter person shall be deemed senior to the former subject 
to the provisions in the first proviso: 

Provided also that the seniority of,____

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

persons  advised  by  the  Public  Service  Commission  for  appointment  as  Assistant
Surgeons other than Dental Surgeons in the Health Services Department after 14-
5-1963 and before the issue of G.O.(P) No. 255/Public (SS) Department dated 2-3-
1965;
persons advised for appointment as Dental Surgeons, Graduate Nurses and other
Para- Medical Personnel after 14-5-1963 and before 31-3-1965; and
persons  advised  for  appointment  as  Tutors  and  Demonstrators  in  the  Medical
Colleges  after  7-12-1963  and  before  the  issue  of  G.O.  (P)  255/Public  (SS)
Department  dated  2-3-1965  excepting  those  advised  in  the  specialties  of
Anesthesiology and Radiology in the context of the National Emergency,

shall notwithstanding anything contained in any Judgment, Decree or Order of any Court, 
be determined as follows.-  

(a) Persons  selected  by  the  concerned  Defence  Selection  Board  to  serve  in  the
Defence  Force  of  India  from  among  those  candidates  advised  by  the  Public  Service 
commission from a particular advice list shall be placed in list 'A' and those not selected in 
list 'B'.  The candidates included in list 'A' shall be senior to those included in list 'B'.  The 
ranking of the candidates in list 'A'  and list 'B' shall be done in accordance with the inter- 
se-seniority  of  the  candidates  as fixed  in the order  in which their names  are  arranged  in 
the  relevant advice  letters  of the Commission and in  accordance with the  date  of  earliest 
effective advice; 

(b) Women candidates advised for appointment to the posts of Assistant Surgeons,
Tutors and Demonstrators from the ranked lists prepared after 4-8-1964 and who did not 
express  their  willingness  to  serve  in  the  Defence  Forces  shall  be  placed  in  list  'C'.    The 
candidates included in list 'C' shall be junior to those in list 'B'.  The inter-se-seniority of 
persons included in list 'C' shall be fixed according to the order in which their names are 
arranged in the relevant advice letters of the Commission and in accordance with the date 
of earliest effective advice. 

Provided  further  that  approved  probationers/permanent  officers  who  avail    leave 
without allowance for taking up employment abroad or within India or for study purpose 
or  for  joining    spouse  abroad  or  within  India  as  per  the  provisions  in  Appendix  XII  A, 
Appendix  XII  B,  Appendix  XII  C  respectively  of  Part  I,  of  Kerala  Service  Rules,  shall  lose 
their seniority in the service, class, category or grade with reference  to their juniors in the 
service, class, category or grade who might get promoted before they re-join duty. 

Note.____

The  date  of  effective  advice  in  this  Rule  means  the  date  of  the  letter  of  the 
Commission on the basis of which the candidate was appointed. 

27 A.    Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  rule  27,  in  the  case  of  a  person 
appointed  as Lower Division Clerk  or Lower Division  Typist  in  a  service  prior  to  the  19th 
October, 1962 and transferred thereafter from the Unit of the Department in which he was 
appointed to another Unit of the same department, seniority in the Unit of the Department 
to  which  he  was  transferred  shall  be  determined  with  reference  to  the  date  of  his 
appointment  in  the  Unit  of  the  Department  from  which  he  was  transferred  subject, 
however,  to  the  condition  that  the  seniority  so  determined  shall  not  adversely  affect  the 
seniority  of any person who has been promoted on a regular basis in the unit to which he 
was transferred prior to the date of his transfer.  

 27  B.    In  case  of  disputes  regarding  seniority  and  matters  connected  with  it  by 
reason  of  any  order  of  Government  or  any  order  of  an  authority  subordinate  to 
Government,  representations  for  reconsideration  of  such  order  shall  be  submitted  to 
Government by the aggrieved person within a period of six months from the date of receipt 
of  the  order,  or  the  date  of  publication  of  the  order  in  the  Kerala  Gazette,  whichever  is 
later. 

28.

(a) Promotion.____(i) Except in the case of appointment to the posts of  Heads
of  Department  no member of a service or class of a service shall  be eligible for promotion 
from the category in which he was appointed to the service unless   he has satisfactorily 
completed his probation in that category: 

Provided that a probationer in a class, category or grade shall not be superseded for 
promotion to  a higher class,  category  or  grade  by  his junior, if the  vacancy  in the higher 
class,  category  or  grade  arises  within  the  period  specified  in  the  Special  Rules  for 
completion of probation in the class, category or grade in which he is probationer and if he 
has  passed    the  test  or  tests  prescribed  for  successful  completion  of  probation  and  is 
otherwise  eligible  and suitable for  such  promotion;  but his  promotion  shall  be  subject to 
the condition that he satisfactorily completes the probation in the class, category or grade 
from which he was promoted within the period prescribed thereof, and for this purpose the 
period  of  service  put  in  by  him  in  the  higher  class,  category  or  grade  shall  be  reckoned 
towards probation in the class, category or grade from which he was promoted  and also in 
the class, category or grade to which he was promoted: 

Provided further that if  a  probationer  promoted in  pursuance  of the above  proviso 
fails to complete his probation in the class, category or grade from which he was promoted 
within  the  period  prescribed  thereof,  his  probation  in  the  higher  class,  category  or  grade 
shall be terminated and he shall be reverted to the class, category or grade from which he 
was promoted, and any subsequent promotion of such person to the higher class, category 
or grade shall not also entitle such person to claim seniority in the higher class, category 
or  grade  by  reason  only  of his  previous  promotion  in  pursuance  of the  preceding  proviso 
and he shall commence probation afresh in that class, category or grade from the date of 
such subsequent promotion. 

(ii) Where the Special Rules for a  service provide for appointment by promotion to
any class or category from a specified class or category of such service, no member shall 
be eligible for such appointment unless he is a full member or an approved probationer in 
the class or category so specified: 

Provided that if he is the holder of a post in any service for which no probation has 
been  prescribed,  he  shall  not  be  eligible  for  promotion  unless  he  has  put  in  satisfactory 
service  in  that  post  for  a  period  of  one  year  on  duty  within  a  continuous  period  of  two 
years. 

(iii)

Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  these  Rules  or  in  the  Special
Rules/Executive  Orders,  the  period  of  probation  for  persons  appointed  by  direct 
recruitment  or  recruitment  by  transfer  through  Public  Service  Commission  shall  be  two 
years  on  duty  within  a  continuous  period  of  three  years  and  for  persons  appointed  in  a 
post or category from another post or category in the same service or appointed by transfer 
from one service to another within the same  Department or in another Department (where 

direct recruitment is not resorted to) shall be one year on duty within a continuous period 
of two years. 

(b) (i)  Promotion  and  appointment  by  transfer  according  to  merit  and  ability.____
Appointments  to  posts  in  a  selection  category  or  grade  in  a  service  or  class,  other  than 
Heads of Departments which shall be made under Rule 28A, shall be made from a select 
list prepared from among the members eligible for appointment to such category or grade 
in  accordance  with  these  rules  and  the  Special  Rules,  on  the  basis  of  merit  and  ability, 
seniority being considered only when merit and ability are approximately equal.  The select 
list shall be prepared in the manner indicated herein. 

(1) Selection of candidates for appointment to selection categories or grades shall be

made by Departmental Promotion Committees constituted for each Department. 

(2) A  Departmental  Promotion  Committee  shall  consist  of  a  member  of  the  Public

Service Commission and,__

(a) In the case of a Departmental Promotion Committee for selection to a post other
than  the  lowest  post  in  the  State  Service,  the  Appointing  Authority  or  in  case  the 
Appointing  Authority  is  the  Government,  a  nominee  of  the  Government,  and  the  Head  of 
the Department concerned: 

(b) In  the  case  of  a  Departmental  Promotion  Committee  for  selection  to  the  lowest
post  in  the  State  Service,  the  Appointing  Authority  for  the  post  and  a  nominee  of  the 
Government  not  below  the  rank  of  a  Deputy  Secretary  who  is  in  charge  of  the 
administration of the Department concerned. 

(3) The  member  of  the  Public  Service  Commission  shall  be  the  Chairman  of  the
Departmental Promotion Committee and the authority to initiate action and to function as 
Convener of the Committee shall be the appointing authority. 

(4) The  Committee  shall  meet    periodically  to  prepare  select  lists,in  the  order  of
merit,  of  the  Officers  selected  for  appointment.    The  Committee  may  also  hold  ad  hoc 
meetings  for  the  purpose  of  making  selections  to  particular  vacancies  whenever  occasion 
arises.    The  criterion  for  assessment  of  merit  shall  be  the  confidential  reports  of  the 
officers.  The confidential reports of the officers for at least the preceding three years shall 
be made available to the Committee for this purpose.  Where remediable adverse remarks 
recorded in the confidential report of a Government Servant are not communicated to the 
officer  concerned,  such  remarks  shall  be  ignored  by  the  Departmental  Promotion 
Committee  while  considering  his  case  for  promotion.    The  following  procedure  shall  be 
adopted by the Departmental Promotion Committee for the preparation of select lists:____

(a) Select lists shall be prepared during a calendar year for the vacancies estimated

to arise in the next calendar year; 

(b) During  the  first  six  months  of  the  year  action  shall  be  taken  to  make  all  the
Confidential  Reports  up-to-date,  adverse  remarks  communicated,  and  orders 
for 
expunging  such  remarks  issued  wherever  necessary.  Simultaneously  seniority  lists  shall 
also  be  made  up-to-date  and  probation  of  officers  in  the  field  of  choice  declared. 
Confidential Reports and seniority lists shall be made up to date before 30th June; 

(c) ***   ***   ***   ***   ***  ***

(d) During  September/October  the  Departmental  Promotion  Committees  will  be
convened and select lists prepared which will be notified before 30th November and in any 

case not later than December 31.  If any officer becomes qualified after the preparation of 
the  select  list,  but,  before  the  occurrence  of  the  vacancy,  the  Departmental  Promotion 
Committee shall meet subsequently and his name shall be considered for inclusion in the 
select list; 

(e) At the time of change over from the existing system the number of vacancies for

the current year and the next year shall be considered together. 

(4a)  Where  confidential  reports  for  the  three  years  mentioned  in  sub-clause  (4) 
are  not  available  in  respect  of  an  Officer  who  was  under  suspension  but  has  been 
reinstated  or who was or is on long leave, the suitability of the officer shall be assessed,__

(i) in    the    case  of  an    Officer  who  has  been  reinstated    after  suspension  fully
exonerating him of the charges or in the case of an officer  who was or is on long leave, on 
the basis of the confidential reports for a period of three years (excluding the period during 
which  the  officer  was  under  suspension  or  on  long  leave  or  is  on  long  leave,  as  the  case 
may  be  )  preceding  the  date  of  the  meeting  and  if  the  Confidential  Reports  for  the  said 
period  are  not  available,  on  the  basis  of  the  Confidential  Report  for  the  one  year 
immediately  after  reinstatement  or,  as  the  case  may  be,  immediately  after  rejoining  duty 
after leave; 

(ii)

in the case of an Officer who has been reinstated after suspension imposing a
penalty,  on the  basis  of the  confidential  reports for the  period  after  reinstatement  (which 
shall not be less than one year.) 

(4b)  where  confidential  reports  for  the  three  years  mentioned  in  sub-clause(4)  are 
not  available  in  respect  of  an  officer  for  no  fault  of  his  up  to  a  period  of  six  months,  the 
Departmental  promotion  Committee  shall  consider,  ignoring  the  non-availability  of  the 
report for the said period, the suitability of the officer based on the available report or by 
getting special confidential report from the Superior Officer/Higher Authority under whom 
the Officer is working at the time of consideration of his case. 

(5) On  matters  in  respect  of  which  there  is  difference  of  opinion,  the  views  of  the
majority of the members of the Committee shall prevail.  Provided that where the Member 
of  the  Public  Service  Commission  requires  that  the  Public  Service  Commission  shall  be 
consulted before final recommendation is made, such consultation shall be made. 

(6) The Departmental Promotion Committee shall first decide the field of choice, that
is,  the  number  of  eligible  officers  awaiting  appointment  who  should  be  considered  for 
inclusion  in the "Select  list".  Provided, however, that  an  officer  of  outstanding merit,  and 
his seniors, if any, in the category or grade may be included in the list of eligibles even if 
he or such seniors are outside the normal field of choice. 

Note.- 

The field of choice shall as far as possible be thrice and at least twice the  number of 
vacancies expected within  a year plus the  number of the  superseded  officers  of the 
previous year. For example, if there are two anticipated vacancies and the number of 
superseded officers  of  the previous years is 4, the panel  for the field of choice shall 
normally contain 10 names (6+4) or at least 8 (4+4). 

(7) The "Select List" shall be prepared from among the eligible officers on the basis
of  merit  and  ability,  seniority  being  a  consideration  only  when  all  the  qualifications  are 
equal.  The number of names to be included in the "Select List" shall be the same as the 
estimated number of vacancies likely to arise during the next year. Supplemental lists may 
be prepared in case the lists already prepared get exhausted before the close of the year to 
which  they  relate  so  as  to  obviate  the  necessity  for  convening  meetings  of  Departmental 

Promotion  Committees  at  short  notice  or  keeping  of  posts  unfilled  and  thereby  causing 
administrative  inconvenience.    Persons  selected  for  inclusion  in  the  Select  List  shall  be 
ranked  in  the  Select  List  according  to  their  seniority  in  the  feeder  category.  When  the 
Special Rules provide for a definite ratio or order of preference from the feeder categories, 
persons  from  each  feeder  category  shall  be  included  in  separate  select  lists  and 
appointment shall be made in accordance with the ratio or order of preference prescribed 
by such Special Rules for each feeder category. 

Note.- (i) 

 Officers under suspension and officers against whom criminal proceedings are 
pending in a Sessions Court or in any other higher Court for grave offences 
like  murder,  dacoity,  etc;  and  Officers  against  whom  departmental 
proceedings  are  taken  for  the  imposition  of  a  major  penalty  under  the 
disciplinary rules applicable to them should not be included in the select list. 
But the suitability of such an Officer for promotion should be assessed at the 
relevant  time  by  the  Departmental  Promotion  Committee  and  a  finding 
reached  whether,  if  the  Officer  had  not  been  suspended  or  the  criminal 
proceedings/  departmental  proceedings  had  not  been  pending  against  him, 
he  would  have  been  recommended/selected  for  promotion.    Where  a  select 
list  is  prepared  the  Departmental  Promotion  Committee  shall  also  make  a 
finding as to what the position of the Officer in that list would have been but 
for  the  suspension  or  the  criminal  proceedings/  departmental  proceedings 
against him. "The findings as to the suitability and the place in the select list 
of the officer should be recorded separately and attached to the proceedings. 
The  proceedings  of  the  Departmental  Promotion  Committee  need  only 
contain  a  note.    “The  findings  are  recorded  in  the attached  sheet  of  paper". 
The  authority  competent  to  fill  the  vacancy  should  be  separately  advised  to 
fill the vacancy only on a temporary basis. Officers against whom vigilance or 
departmental proceedings are taken after the charges have prima facie been 
established in a preliminary enquiry should not be included in the select list. 
But,  the  cases  of  such  Officers  should  also  be  assessed.    The  question  of 
including  them  in  the  select  list  shall  be  considered  when  the  result  of  the 
enquiry is known.  However Officers against whom departmental proceedings 
are taken for the imposition of a minor penalty may be included in the select 
list  provisionally  if  they  are  found  suitable  but  for  the  pendency  of 
disciplinary proceedings initiated against them. 

(ii)

The  vacancy  that  would  have  gone  to  the  Officer  but  for  his  suspension  or
the  criminal  proceedings/departmental  proceedings  against  him  for  the
imposition of a major penalty should be filled only on  a temporary basis by 
the  next  person  in  the  approved  list.  If  the  Officer  concerned  is 
completely  exonerated,  he  will  be  promoted  thereafter  to  the  post  filled  on 
a  temporary  basis,  the  arrangements  made  previously  being  reversed.    If 
the  exoneration  is  not  complete,  the  Departmental  Promotion  Committee 
may  decide  each  case  on  its  merits.    Where,  however,  the  post  which 
would  have  gone  to  the  Officer  but  for  his  suspension  or  the  criminal 
proceedings/  departmental  proceedings  against  him,  ceases  to  exist 
before  the  conclusion  of  the  disciplinary  proceedings,  he  will  be  promoted 
to  the  first  vacancy  that  may  be  available  in  future  if  he  is  found  fit  for 
promotion  at  that  time.    If  the  officers  against  whom  departmental 
proceedings  are  taken  for  imposition  of  a  minor  penalty  and  who  have 
been  provisionally  included  in  the  select  list  are  fully  exonerated  of  the 
charges,  their  cases  for  promotion  on  the  basis  of  such  inclusion  in  the 
select  list  shall  be  considered.    If  the  Officers  are  not  fully  exonerated  of 
the  charges,  the  Departmental  Promotion  Committee  may  decide  each 
case on its own merit. 

(iii)

Officers  whose  names  are  included  in  the  select  list  but  who  are  subsequently
placed  under  suspension  or  against  whom  criminal  proceedings  are  taken  in  a
Sessions  Court  or  in  any  other  higher  Court  for  grave  offences  and  officers
against  whom  departmental  proceedings  are  taken  for  the  imposition  of  a  major
penalty  under  the  disciplinary  rules  applicable  to  them,  shall  not  be  promoted  on
the  basis  of  their  inclusion  in  the  select  list  until  they  are  fully  exonerated  of  the
charges  against  them.    If  the  officer  is  fully  exonerated  of  the  charges,  he  shall
be  promoted  on  the  basis  of  his  position  in  the  select  list    to  the  post  which  has
been  filled  on  a  temporary  basis  pending  disposal  of  the  charges  against  him.  If
the  Officer  is  not  fully  exonerated,  the  Departmental  Promotion  Committee
may  consider  each  case  on 
its  own  merit.  Officers  whose  names  are
included  in  the  select  list  but  against  whom  departmental  proceedings  for
imposing  a  minor    penalty  are  initiated  subsequently,  may  be  promoted  on  a
temporary basis pending disposal of the proceedings against them.  If the   Officer
is  fully  exonerated  of  the  charges  the  temporary  promotion  shall  be  treated  as
regular  promotion  and  if  the  Officer  is  not  fully  exonerated  of  the  charges,  his
case  may  be  considered  by  the  Departmental  Promotion  Committee  on
merits.

(iii  a)  The  inclusion  of  the  names  of  Officers  in  the  select  list  after  decision  by  the 
Departmental Promotion Committee on their cases on merits under Note (ii) or Note 
(iii) and their consequent promotion shall be subject to further reassessment by the
Departmental  Promotion  Committee  on  the  basis  of  orders  passed  in  appeal  or
review.  If the Departmental Promotion Committee revises the select list on further
reassessment and if by that time the Officer has been promoted on the basis of his
inclusion in the earlier select list, the orders promoting the Officer shall be revised
in  accordance  with    the  revised  select  list.    In  such  cases  the  appointment  as  per
the  revised  order  only  shall  be  considered  as  regular  appointment.    However,  this
revision of order of appointment shall be made only if the orders in appeal or review
are  passed  within  a  period  of  one  year  from  the  date  of  order  of  promotion  of  the
Officer.  In the cases of those who are not included in the select list prepared after
reassessment  under  Notes  (ii)  or  (iii)  above,  but  who  are  fully  exonerated  of  the
charges  on  appeal  or  review  passed  within  a  period  of  two  years  from  the  date  of
publication  of  the  select  list,  a  further  reassessment  shall  be  made  and  the  select
list  as  well  as  appointments  ordered  on  the  basis  of  it  shall  be  revised  including
such officers also in the select list if they are otherwise eligible for inclusion therein.

(iv) Where while preparing a select list an officer has been superseded on account of his
confidential report for the one year referred to in sub- clause (4a) not being available
due to non-completion of the said period of one year, the select list shall be treated
as  provisional  to  the  extent  it  relates  to  the  officers  junior  to  the  officer  so
superseded,  and  as  soon  as  the  confidential  reports  in  respect  of  such  officer
relating  to  the  said  one  year  become  available,  the  departmental  promotion
committee shall review the list and make it absolute, after considering the claims of
the officer with reference to the confidential reports for the said one year.

(v)

A  censure  under  Rule  11  (I)  (i)  of  the  Kerala  Civil  Services  (Classification,  Control
and  Appeal)  Rules,  1960  or  a  warning  awarded  or  proposed  to  be  awarded  to  an
Officer  need  not  be  taken  into  account  while  considering  his  case  for  promotion
under Note (ii), (iii) and (iii a) above.

(vi) When there are more than one feeder category carrying different scales of pay, they
shall  be  shown  in  separate  lists  and  persons  in  a  lower  scale  of  pay  shall  be
appointed  only  after  appointing  all  persons  on  a  higher  scale  of  pay,  unless  the

Special  Rules  prescribe  a  ratio  or  any  special  order  of  preference  for  each  feeder 
category. 

(vii) When the posts in the feeder categories are on the same scale of pay and there is no
fixed  ratio,  appointment  shall  be  made  in  accordance  with  their  seniority  in  the
feeder  category,  the  seniority  being  determined  by  the  date  of  the  order  of  first 
appointment to that particular category, class or grade. 

(8)(a)  The  select  list  prepared  by  the  Department  Promotion  Committee  in  the 
manner  referred  to  above  shall  be  published  by  the  Convener  of  the  Committee  after 
approval by the Government.  Normally no revision of such select list shall be made under 
Rule  29  on  the  basis  of  re-evaluation  of  the  confidential  reports.    However,  if  any  officer 
who has been superseded and whose name has not been included in the list makes, within 
one month from the date of publication of the list, a written representation to the convener 
of the Departmental Promotion Committee requesting a revision of the list, the Committee 
shall  consider  the  representation.    After  going  through  the  representation,  if  the 
Committee feels that some clarification should be obtained from the superseded officer by 
personal  hearing,  if  may  do  so  and  on  the  basis  of  such  representation  and  personal 
hearing if it is of the view that the list already prepared should be revised, it may make a 
recommendation to the effect.  The list shall then be revised accordingly and published by 
the Convener after approval by the Government. 

Note.-- Promotions from the first list published by the Departmental Promotion 
 Committee shall be provisional and the list will be subject to revision, if, 
 after following the procedure, it is found that the list requires revision. 

(b)

Wherever  Government  consider  that  there  are  exceptional  circumstances
which warrant  a  departure  from the  advice  of  the  Departmental  Promotion Committee  in 
the  public  interest,  the  Departmental  Promotion  Committee  shall  be  given  a  fresh 
opportunity  to  consider  the  proposals  of  the  Government  to  revise  the  select  list.    If  on 
receipt  of  the  recommendation  of  the  Departmental  Promotion  Committee,  Government 
still  feel  that  there  are  exceptional  circumstances  which  warrant  a  departure  from  the 
advice  of  the  Departmental  Promotion  Committee  in  the  public  interest,  they  may  take  a 
decision  accordingly.    In  that  case  it  will  be  open  to  the  Public  Service  Commission  to 
include the matter in the Annual Report: 

Provided that the power under this paragraph shall not be exercised after the expiry 
of  one  year  from  the  date  on  which  the  select  list  was  prepared  by  the  Departmental 
Promotion Committee. 

(9)

The "Select List" shall be reviewed annually and it shall remain in force until
it  is  revised.   Names  of  those  officers who have  already  been  appointed  shall  be  removed 
from the list and the rest of the names along with those officers who may now be included 
in the field of choice, shall be considered for the "Select List" for the subsequent period.  A 
person  included  in  an  earlier  select  list,  shall,  however,  be  ranked  above  a  person 
considered  for  a  subsequent  list,  unless  his  conduct    and  work  subsequent  to  such 
inclusion renders it necessary that he should be placed lower in the list or his name my be 
omitted from the list if there is definite deterioration in the work and conduct of the Officer 
subsequent to his inclusion in the select list for the previous year, as the case may be. 

(10)

The claims of a person who qualifies himself for a post, after the select list in
respect of that post has been prepared but before the date of occurrence of the vacancy in 
the higher post shall not be over looked. 

(11)

The  select  list  shall  be  reviewed  and  revised  for  the  purpose  of  sub-clause
(10) in cases where the acquisition of an extra qualification or the gaining of a prescribed
period  of  experience  is  insisted  on  as  conditions  precedent  to  the  selection  to  the  higher
post.  In such cases the following procedure shall be followed:____

The Convener of the Departmental Promotion Committee concerned should bring to 
the specific notice of the Committee the case of all senior hands who are being overlooked 
in  drawing  up  the  select list for want  of  qualification  or  experience  and  who  are  likely  to 
acquire  that  qualification  or  experience  during  the  pendency  of  the  list.    The  select  list 
drawn up at the meeting shall be treated as provisional to the extent to which it relates to 
the  junior  hands  included  in  the  select  list  whose  seniors  are  likely  to  become  fully 
qualified  during  the  pendency  of  the  list.    When  such  senior  hands  acquire  the 
qualification  and/or  experience  which  would  make  them  eligible  for  appointment,  the 
Convener  shall  take  early  steps  for  the  convening  of  an  ad  hoc  meeting  of  the 
Departmental  Promotion  Committee  and  after  considering  the  claims  of  such  persons, 
revise, if necessary, the provisional portion of the select list.  The provisional portion of the 
select  list,  if  revised,  shall  be  made  absolute  following  the  procedure  laid  down  in  sub- 
clause (8) above and the process repeated wherever necessary. 

Note.-  (i)    As  a  person  included  in  the  earlier  select  list  shall  be  ranked  above  a  person 
considered for a subsequent list, unless his work and conduct subsequent to such 
inclusion  renders  it  necessary  that  he  should  be  placed  lower  in  the  list  the 
calculation  of  anticipated  vacancies 
for  purpose  of  preparing  annual  or 
supplemental select lists shall be done as accurately as possible. 

(ii) Claims  of  persons  previously  omitted 

from  the 

list  shall  be  considered

whenever new lists are prepared.

(12) The recommendations made by the Departmental Promotion Committees shall be
treated  as  recommendations  having  the  approval  of  the  Public  Service  Commission,  and 
the convention regarding acceptance of the advice of the Commission shall apply to them. 
In cases where the Commission has been consulted, the convention regarding consultation 
with  the  Commission  shall  similarly  apply  to  the  final  recommendations  made  by  the 
Commission. 

(13) Candidates  belonging  to  Scheduled  Castes  and  Scheduled  Tribes  shall  not  be
superseded for appointment to Selection categories or grades by the application of too rigid 
a standard of suitability.  The Departmental Promotion Committees may consider the case 
of such candidates sympathetically by relaxing the standard of suitability where possible, 
and  only  the  claims  of  those  whom  the  committee  considers  unsuitable  even  by  the 
relaxed  standards  should  be  superseded  for  appointment  to  such  selection  categories  or 
grades. 

(14) Notwithstanding  anything  contained  under  this  rule,  the  Government  may  by
order  effect  promotion/appointments  by  transfer  notionally  without  monetary  benefit  of 
pay  and  allowances  but  with  consequential  pensionary  benefits,  to  a  pensioner  without 
having to follow  the  procedures  such  as  preparation,  publication and  review  of select  list 
by  convening  the  Departmental  Promotion  Committee,  if  it  is  found  later  on  after  his 
retirement that he would have become eligible at any time during the course of his service 
for  being  promoted  or  appointed  to  such  posts,  categories  or  grades  in  that  service  had 
due  procedure  according  to  the  rule  existing  at  that  time  or  made  applicable  thereafter 
been followed at the appropriate time.   

(iA)  Preparation  of  select  list  subsequent  to  the  occurrence  of  vacancy.-  When  a 
select list is prepared subsequent to the occurrence of a vacancy, no person who was not 

qualified  for  inclusion  in  the  select  list  at  the  time  of  occurrence  of  the  vacancy  shall  be 
included in the select list for appointment against that vacancy. 

Note.- 

 If there are no qualified persons for promotion to a post on the date of occurrence of 
the  vacancy,  the  person  who  gets  qualified  first  thereafter,  shall    be  considered  for 
promotion to that post: 

Provided  that  where  the  Special  Rules  in  respect  of  the  post  provide  that  direct 
recruitment shall be resorted to in the absence of qualified candidates for promotion on the 
date of occurrence of the vacancy, recruitment to the post shall be made accordingly. 

(ii) Promotion  and  appointment  by  transfer  to  higher  posts  according  to
seniority:- All other promotions or appointments by transfer to higher posts shall, subject 
to the provisions of these rules and the special rules, be made in accordance with seniority 
subject  to  the  person  being  considered  suitable  for  the  post.    Punishments  other  than 
censure awarded within a period of three years immediately preceding such promotion or 
appointment  by  transfer  shall  be  taken  into  account  in  determining  the  suitability  of  a 
person for promotion or appointment by transfer. 

Note.-   (i) 

when there are more than one feeder category carrying different scales of 

pay, persons in lower scale of pay shall be appointed only after appointing  
persons in the higher scale of pay unless the Special Rules provide a ratio or 
any special preference for each feeder category. 

(ii) When the post in the feeder category has the same scale of pay and the

Special Rules prescribe no fixed ratio or preference, appointment shall be  
made in accordance with the seniority in the feeder category, the same being  
determined in the manner as provided in the first proviso to clause (a) of rule 
27 of the General Rules.  If the length of service or seniority of persons in the 
feeder categories are the same, the person senior in age may be given  
preference over the other. 

(bb)  Promotion  which depends  upon  the  passing  of  any  examination.-  Promotion 
in  a  service  or  class  which  depends  upon  the  passing  of  any  examination  (General  or 
Departmental)  shall  ordinarily  be  made    with  reference  to  the  conditions  existing  at  the 
time of occurrence of the vacancies and not with reference  to those at the time when the 
question of promotions is taken up. 

(bbb) Where a pass in any examination or test confers on a person the title to any 
right, benefit or concession, such title to the right, benefit or concession shall be deemed 
to have accrued- 

(a)

in  the  case  of  a  person who  has  passed such  examination  or test before the
14th August, 1971, on the day following the last day of such examination or test in
the subject or subjects; and

(b)

in the case of a person who has passed such examination or test on or after 14th
August 1971, on the day following the last day of the whole examination or test in
which  he  has  successfully  completed  the  examination  or  test  by  passing  one  or
more subjects.

Explanation.- (1)  The principles in this sub-rule shall apply for the drawal of increment 
and  for  promotion  not  involving  change  of  duties  against  vacancies 
remaining unfilled for want of test qualified persons; 

(2) Where  a  person  can  choose    between    two  examinations  or  tests  or
corresponding  subjects  or  papers  of  two  examinations  or  tests  and
where  the  two  examinations  or  tests  conducted  during  the  same
period  end  on  two  different  dates,  the  title  to  the  right,  benefit  or
concession  conferred  by  the  passing  of  the  examination  or  test
shall  be  deemed  to  have  accrued  on  the  day  following  the  last  date
of  the  whole  of  the  examination  or  test  which  ends  on  the  latter
date;

(3)

(4)

(5)

The  expression  "the  last  day  of  such  examination  or  test  in  the
subject  or  subjects  "  occurring  in  clause  (a)  of  this  sub-  rule  shall
mean  the  last  day  on  which  according  to  the  schedule  of  the
examination  or  test  first  published  by  the  Kerala  Public  Service
Commission,  such  examination  or  test  in  the  subject  or  subjects
would  have  been  conducted  if  the  examination  or  test  in  any  of  the
subjects had not been postponed to a latter date;

The  expression  "the  last  day  of  the  whole  examination  or  test"
occurring in clause (b) of this sub-rule shall mean the day on which,
according  to  the  schedule  of  the  examination  or  test  first  published
by  the Kerala  Public Service Commission, the  examination  or test in
the  last  of  the  subjects  comprising  the  whole  examination  or  test
would have been conducted, if the examination or test in any of such
subjects had not been postponed to a later date.

The  expression  'any  examination  or  test'  occurring  in this  sub  -  rule
shall  mean  any  examination  or  test  conducted  by  the  Kerala  Public
Service  Commission,  Government  or  Department  which  has  a  direct
nexus  with  the  service  matters  like  probation,  promotion,  increment
etc.,  of  an  employee,  and  not  an  academic  examination/  University
Examination.

Note.- Cases already settled or disposed of prior to the issue of this   amendment shall not be 

reopened. 

 This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 10 th 
December 1984. 

(c)

*****

****** 

******** 

(d) Duty in a different service counting for probation on promotion.-  A member of a
service  or  a  class  of  service  promoted  from  one  category  to  another  shall  be  eligible  to 
count for probation in the higher category his service, if any, performed otherwise than in 
a substantive capacity on regular appointment to another service, State or Subordinate, in 
accordance with these Rules and the Special rules  if the normal method of recruitment to 
the latter service is according to such Special rules by transfer from the former service or 
class thereof.  

(e) Probation  where  there  are  more  than  one  grade  to  the  same  category.-  Not
withstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Special Rules where there are more 
than  one  grade  to  the  same  category  and  duties  and  responsibilities  attached  to  the 
various grades are one and the same, and appointment to the higher grades are made by 
promotion from the lower grades then probation shall be insisted only in the lowest grade 
to such category. 

    28  A.  Notwithstanding anything contained in these Rules or in the Special Rules, in 
the case of appointment to the post of Heads of Departments, direct recruitment shall be 
resorted to in the absence of suitable persons for appointment by promotion or by transfer. 
Appointment by promotion or by transfer shall be made on the basis of merit and ability, 
seniority being considered only when merit and ability are approximately equal.  Merit and 
ability  shall  be  assessed  by  the  authority  competent  in  the  Government  to  make  such 
appointments: 

Provided  that  the  lists  for  consideration  for  appointment  by  promotion  or  by 
transfer to the posts shall not ordinarily consist of members of service who do not have at 
least one year of service before the date of their superannuation after appointment to such 
a post. 

29.

Revision  of  orders  of  appointement  to  selection  posts.-  Subject  to  the
provisions  of  Note  (iii  a)  of    sub-clause  (7)  and  Para  (a)]  of  sub-  clause  (8)  of  clause  (i)  of 
sub-rule  (b)  of  rule  28  an  order  appointing  a  member  of  a  service  or  class  to  a  selection 
category  or  grade  by  promotion  or  by  transfer  may  be  revised  by  the  State  Government. 
Such revision may be made by the State Government either suo motu at any time or on a 
petition  submitted  by  any  aggrieved  member  within  six  months  from  the  date  of  passing 
the order: 

    Provided that the said period of six months may be extended by the State Government 

if sufficient cause is shown for the delay in the submission of the petition. 

30.

Revision  of  list  of  approved  candidates  for  appointment  or  promotion.-
Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  these  Rules  or  in  the  Special  Rules,  the  State 
Government  shall  have  power  to  revise  in  any  manner  they  consider  suitable,  any  list  of 
approved  candidates,  for  appointment  or  promotion  to  any  category,  class  or  service, 
prepared by the Head of a Department, in exercise of the powers conferred on him by the 
Special Rules for any service. 

31.

Temporary  Promotion.-  (a)  (i)  Where  it  is  necessary  in  the  public  interest
owing  to an emergency which has arisen to fill immediately a vacancy in a post borne on 
the cadre of a higher category in a service or class by promotion from a lower category and 
there would be undue delay in making such promotion in accordance with the rules, the 
Appointing Authority may promote a person otherwise than in accordance with the rules, 
temporarily: 

Provided  that  before  a  person  is  promoted  under  this  clause,  persons  who  are 
admittedly senior to him shall also be promoted, even if they are absent from duty whether 
on leave other than leave without allowances granted and availed of as per Appendix XII A, 
Appendix  XII  B  or  Appendix  XII  C  of  Part  I  of  the  Kerala  Services  Rules  or  on  foreign 
service  or  on  deputation  or  for  any  other  valid  reason  except  due  to  suspension  and 
allowed to continue as such subject to the condition that persons so promoted shall not be 

eligible  for  the  higher  time  scale  of  pay  by  virtue  of  such  promotions  unless  otherwise 
specifically ordered by Government. 

Note.-   (1) 

Even where it is considered necessary to sanction the  higher time scale of pay, 
not  more  than  one  person    (either  the  senior  most  fit  person  in  a  series  of 
adjacent persons outside the ordinary line, or, if such a person either foregoes 
the  benefit  of  his  own  volition  or  does  not  require  the  benefit  by  virtue  of  his 
holding a post outside the ordinary line which secures him at least equivalent 
benefits  in  respect  of  salary  and  pension,  then  the  next  below  in  the  series) 
may be authorized to draw the salary of the higher scale or grade in respect of 
any one officiating vacancy within the cadre filled by his junior. 

(2)

(3)

A fortuitous officiating promotion given to a person who is junior to one outside
the regular line does not in itself give rise to a claim on the part of the senior to
the higher time scale of pay.

The expression "persons who are admittedly senior" in the above proviso shall
include  persons  appointed/promoted  temporarily  and  continuing  as  such,
solely due to administrative delay in regularizing their appointments.

(4)

A person who is on leave without allowances granted and availed
of  as  per  Appendix  XII  A,  Appendix  XII  B  or  Appendix  XII  C  of  Part  I  of  the 
Kerala  Services  Rules  shall  be  given  promotion  to  a  higher  post  only  on  his 
return  from  such  leave.    His  rank  and  seniority  in  the  higher  post  shall  be 
determined with reference to the date of promotion 

(5)

If a junior is promoted temporarily in preference to a senior under suspension,
at the time  of reinstatement of  the  senior to  duty fully exonerating  him of the
charges  for  suspension  the  senior  shall  be  given  promotion  to  the  vacancy  in
the higher post to which he would have been promoted but for the suspension,
if necessary by reverting the junior who got promotion in that vacancy.

(ii) No  person  who  does  not  possess  the  qualifications  if  any,  prescribed  for  the
said service, class or category, shall ordinarily be promoted under clause (i).   Every person 
who does not possess such qualifications and who has been or is promoted under clause 
(i) shall  be  replaced  as  soon  as  possible  by  promoting  a  person  possessing  such
qualifications.

(b) Where it is necessary to fill a short vacancy in a post borne on the cadre of
a  higher  category  in  a  service  or  class  by  promotion  from  a  lower  category  and  the 
appointment  of  the  person  who  is  entitled  to  such  promotion  under  the  rules,  would 
involve  excessive  expenditure  on  traveling  allowance  or  exceptional  administrative 
inconvenience, the Appointing Authority may promote any other person who possesses the 
qualifications, if any, prescribed for the higher category. 

(c) A  person  promoted  under  clause    (i)  or    clause  (ii)  of  sub-  rule  (a)  shall  be
replaced as soon as possible by the member of the service who is entitled to the promotion 
under the rules or by a candidate appointed in accordance with the rules, as the case may 
be. 

  These  amendments  shall  be  deemed  to  have  come  into  force  with  effect  from 

17.12.1958. 

(d) A  person  promoted  under  sub-  rule  (a)  or  (b)  shall  not  be  regarded  as  a
probationer in the higher category  or be entitled by reason only of such promotion to any 
preferential claim to future promotion to such higher category. 

(e)

If  such  person  is  subsequently  promoted  to  the  higher  category  in
accordance with the rules he shall commence his probation, if any, in such category from 
the  date  of  such  subsequent  promotion  or  from  such  earlier  date  as  the  appointing 
authority may determine without prejudice to seniority.  

(f) There  shall  be  paid to a person  promoted  under  sub- rule (a) or (b) either
the  minimum  of the higher time  scale  of  pay,  or  the  pay  admissible  to him  in  the higher 
time  scale  based  on  the  pay  in  the  lower  time  scale  applicable  to  him  under  the  rules 
regulating  the  fixation  of  pay  from  time  to  time,  whichever  is  higher.    He  shall  be  paid 
increments  in  the  time  scale  at  the  time  intervals,  as  fixed  by  Government  from  time  to 
time. 

32. Postings and transfers:- (a) A member of  a service or class of a  service may

be required to serve in any post borne on the cadre of such service or class. 

(b) All transfers and posting shall be made by the Appointing Authority.

33. Consequences  of  resignation:-  A  member  of  a  service  shall,  if  he  resigns  his
appointment,  forfeit  not  only  the  service  rendered  by  him  in  the  particular  post  held  by 
him at the time of resignation but all his previous service under the Government. 

The re-appointment of such person to any service shall be treated in the same way 
as a first appointment to such service by direct recruitment and all rules governing such 
appointment shall apply; and on such re-appointment he shall not be entitled to count any 
portion of his previous service for any benefit or concession admissible under any rule or 
order. 

34. Reduction of full members:- (a) If a full member of any service, class, category
or  grade is  substantively  reduced  to  a  lower service,  class, category or  grade, he  shall  be 
deemed to be a full member of the latter and the permanent cadre thereof shall, if there is 
no vacancy in which he could be absorbed, be deemed to be increased by one: 

Provided  that  against  every  such  addition  an  officiating  or  temporary  vacancy,  if 
any,  in  such  lower  service,  class,  category  or  grade,  shall  be  kept  unfilled  and  such 
addition  shall  be  absorbed  in  the  first  permanent  vacancy  that  subsequently  arises  in 
such lower service, class, category or grade, as the case may be. 

(b) Appointment  in  place  of  members  dismissed,  removed  or  reduced:-Where  a
person  has  been  dismissed,  removed  or  substantively  reduced  from  any  service,  class, 
category  or  grade,  no  vacancy  caused  thereby  or  arising  subsequently  in  such  service, 
class, category or grade, shall be substantively filled to the prejudice of such person until 
the  appeal,  if  any,  preferred  by  him  against  such  dismissal,  removal  or  reduction  is 
decided  and  except  in  conformity  with  such  decision,  or  until  the  time  allowed  for 
preferring an appeal has expired, as the case may be. 

35. Savings:-  (a)  (i)  Unless  a  contrary  intention  is  expressly  indicated  therein,
nothing contained in these rules shall adversely affect any person who was member of any 
service on the date of the coming into force of the rules. 

(ii) Unless  a contrary  intention is  expressly indicated  therein nothing  contained  in
any  Special  Rules  governing  a  service,  shall  adversely  affect  any  person  who  was  a 
member of such service on the date of the coming into force thereof. 

(b) Subject to the provisions of sub-rules (c) and (d) where these rules or the Special
Rules would adversely affect in respect of any matter a person who was a member of any 
service before the date of coming into force thereof, he shall, in respect of such matter, be 
governed by the rules and orders, if any, which were applicable to him immediately prior 
to such date.  

(c) A  person  who  was  on  duty  otherwise  than  in  a  substantive  capacity  in  a  post
which was subsequently included in a service shall be regarded as a probationer or; as the 
case may be, as an approved probationer in the service or the class or category thereof in 
which the post is included and in the lower category, if any, in which he would have been 
on duty but for his being on duty in a higher category, if he,- 

(i) was on duty in such post on the date of issue of the Special Rules for that service,

or

(ii) was  absent  from  duty  in  such  post  on  that  date  on  leave  granted  by  a  competent
authority  having  been  on  duty  in  such  post  immediately  before  and  immediately
after such absence:

Provided that if there were no rules or orders prescribing the period of probation for
such post at the time of his first appointment thereto, the provisions of these rules and of 
the Special Rules regarding probation shall apply to him and any period of duty rendered 
by him in such post before the date of issue of such rules shall count towards probation if 
and to the extent such service would have counted, had these rules and the Special Rules 
come into force at the time of such first appointment. 

(d) A person who, before the issue of the Special Rules for a service had officiated in
a  post which was subsequently  included  in the  service  or  a class  or category thereof  but 
who is not  entitled  to be  regarded  as  a  probationer  or as  an  approved  probationer under 
sub-rule (c) shall, if he is again appointed to such post after the issue of the Special Rules 
without  contravening  any  orders  of  the  State  Government,  be  entitled  to  count  his 
previous service in such post towards the prescribed period of probation: 

Provided that such previous service shall not count towards probation if there was 
an interval of a continuous period of two years or more during which he was not holding a 
post in the same or higher category. 

Explanation:- 

The re-appointment of a person under this sub-rule shall not, for the 
purposes  of  rules  regulating  recruitment,  be  regarded  as  first 
appointment to the service, class or category concerned. 

(e) If, before the issue of the Special Rules, a person had been exempted under the
orders then in force from the possession of any qualification or the passing of any test and 
the  possession  of  such  qualification  or  the  passing  of  such  test  is  prescribed  by  such 
Special  Rules  they  shall  not  apply  to  such  person  to  the  extent  and  in  respect  of  the 
category, grade or post, specifically covered by the order of exemption. 

(f) Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules or in the Special Rules, in the
case  of  persons  allotted  to  the  State  of  Kerala  from  service  under  the  Government  of 
Madras  consequent  on  the  Reorganization  of  States,  pass  in  Account  Test  for  Executive 

Officers (Madras) and pass in Account Test for Subordinate Officers Part I (Madras) shall 
respectively  be  accepted  as  sufficient  qualification  in  lieu  of  pass  in  Account  Test  for 
Executive Officers of the Kerala State and pass in Account Test (Lower). 

36. Re-employment  of  pensioners:-  Nothing  in  these  rules  or  the  Special  Rules
shall  be  construed  to  limit  or  abridge  the  powers  of  the  State  Government  and  of 
subordinate  authorities  to  re-employ  persons  who  have  retired  on  a  civil  pension  or 
gratuity  or  who,  while  in  service,  were  subscribers  to  a  Contributory  Provident  Fund,  in 
any service. The re-employment of such a person in any service shall not be regarded as a 
first appointment to that service. 

37. Appointment  of  All  India  Service  Officers  to  State  posts:-  Notwithstanding
anything contained in these rules or the Special Rules, an officiating or permanent officer 
of an All India Service may be appointed to any State Service, or class or category thereof. 
Such  Officer  shall  not,  by  reason  of  such  appointment,  cease  to  be  a  member  of  an  All 
India Service. 

38. Relinquishment of rights by members:- Any person may, in writing, relinquish
any right or privilege to which he may be entitled under these rules or the Special Rules, if, 
in the  opinion  of the  Appointing Authority,  such relinquishment is not  opposed to  public 
interest;  and  nothing  contained  in  these  rules  or  the  Special  Rules  shall  be  deemed  to 
require  the  recognition  of  any  right  or  privilege  to  the  extent  to  which  it  has  been  so 
relinquished. 

Explanation: 

The  relinquishment  of  the  right  for  promotion  under  this  rule  shall 
entail loss of seniority and a relinquishment of the right for promotion 
shall  not  be  permissible  unless  such  relinquishment  entails  loss  of 
seniority. 

39. Notwithstanding, anything contained in these rules or in the Special Rules or in
any other Rules or Government Orders the Government shall have power to deal with the 
case of any person or persons serving in a civil capacity under the Government of Kerala 
or  any  candidate  for  appointment  to  a  service  in  such  manner  as  may  appear  to  the 
Government to be just and equitable: 

Provided that where such rules or orders are applicable to the case of any person or 
persons,  the  case  shall  not  be  dealt  with  in  any  manner  less  favourable  to  him  or  them 
than that provided by those rules or orders. 

This  amendment  shall  be  deemed  to  have  come  into  force  with  effect  from  17th 

December 1958. 

    SCHEDULE 

Referred to in rule 10(aa) 

(a) English School Leaving or Secondary School Leaving Certificate issued under the
authority of the Travancore, Cochin, Travancore-Cochin or Kerala State Government with 
endorsement of eligibility for college admission or Public Service. 

(b) Pass in the E.S.L.C or S.S.LC. Examination (Travancore-Cochin or Kerala) as a
private candidate after undergoing a prior selection examination conducted by the Director 
of Public Instruction. 

(c) Pass in two year Sanskrit Entrance Course, Sanskrit College, Trivandrum.

(d) Completed S.S.L.C issued under the authority of the Government of Madras with
endorsement  of  eligibility  for  College  admission,  or  with  marks  not  less  than  the 
percentage of marks specified in column (2) of the table below against the subjects referred 
to in column (1) thereof:- 

TABLE 

I. Academic Course:

1 

1. First Language-Parts I and II
2. English
3. Mathematics (General or Composite)
4. Social Studies
5. General Science

II Secretarial Course: 

2 

 Per cent 

40 (80 marks out of 200). 
40 
35 each in any two of the subjects 
and 30 in the third. 

1. First Language – Part I
2. English
3. Commercial Arithmetic
4. Social Studies
5. Drafting, Precis-writing and Typewriting
6. Two of the following three items:-

40 
40 

(i) Commercial Practice
(ii) Shorthand
(iii)Book-keeping

III. Pre-Technological Course:

A. Engineering-

1. First Language – Part I
2. English
3. Mathematics (General or Composite
4. Social Studies
5. Science and Drawing
6. Applied Science and Practical

B. Agriculture or any other subject-

1. First Language – Part I
2. English
3. Mathematics (General or Composite)
4. Social Studies
5. Agriculture (Theory)
6. Elementary Science and Practical

C. Textile Technology-
1. First Language – Part I
2. English
3. Mathematics (General or Composite)
4. Social Studies
5. Handloom Weaving (Written and

35 in an one of the subjects and 
30 each in the other three 

40 
40 

35 in any one of the subjects and 
30 each in the other three 

40 
40 

35 in any one of the subjects and 
30 each in the other three 

40 
40 

35 in any one of the subjects and 
30 each in the other three 

 Practical) 

6. Dyeing and Printing (Written and

Practical)

IV. Aesthetic and Domestic Course-
(The course consists of Three Parts)

Part I 

 First Language – Part I 

Part II 

 English 
 In each of the other two subjects 
 under part II 

40 

40 

30 in each 

If additional language is taken under this Part the candidate should obtain a total 
number of 80 marks in that language and in Part I of the First Language put together.  If 
General  Science  or  Social  Science  is  taken  as  a  subject  under  this  Part,    35  per  cent 
should be obtained in that subject. 

Part III 

Any one subject under this part 

V. Teaching Practice Course-

1. First Language – Part I

2. English

30 

40 

40 

3. Mathematics (General or Composite)
4. General Science
5. Social Studies
6. Teaching Practice

35 in any one of the subjects and 
30 each in the other three 

Provided  that  in  the  case  of  a  candidate  belonging  to  the  Scheduled  Castes  or 
Scheduled  Tribes,  it  shall  be  sufficient  if  he  has  obtained  not  less  than  35  per  cent  in 
English, not less than 35 per cent in   Part I  of the first language or 70 marks out of 200 
when both Parts I and II of the First Language are taken, as the case may be and not less 
than the percentage of marks specified in the table above in other subjects. 

(i) A  pass  in  a  Government  Technical  Examination  will  be  regarded  as
equivalent  to  obtaining  35  per  cent  of  the  marks  in  the  corresponding
subjects in the Secondary School Leaving Certificate Public Examination; for
this  purpose  where  in  the  latter  examination,  the  technical  subject
comprises two subjects in the Government Technical Examination, passes in
at  least  the  Lower  Grade  are  required  in  both  the  subjects  in  the
Government Technical Examination.

(ii) A pass in a Part of the Intermediate Examination in Arts and Science or the
Pre-University Examination of any recognized university shall be regarded as
equivalent  to  obtaining  the  minimum  numbers  of  marks  prescribed  for  the

corresponding  subject  or  subjects  in  the  Secondary  School  Leaving 
Certificate Public Examination. 

(e) A completed Anglo-Indian School Leaving Certificate issued under the authority
of  the  Government  of  Madras,  with  either  Tamil,  Malayalam,  Kannada,  Hindustani  or 
Hindi  as  his  compulsory  second  language  and  secured  at  the  Anglo-Indian  High  School 
Examination  not  less  than  the  percentage  of  marks  specified  below  in  the  subjects  in 
Group 'A' and not less than 35 per cent in each of three subjects in Group  'B'. 

English 
Elementary Mathematics 
A language 

Group 'A' 

-
-
-

40
35
30 or

(f) Matriculation  Examination  of  a  recognized  University  or  Board  of  Education  or
any  other  Examination  recognized  by  the  Central  or  State  Government  as  equivalent 
thereto; 

Note.-  The following shall be regarded as equivalent to the minimum general 

educational qualification prescribed in the Schedule to the General Rules 
for the State and Subordinate Services:- 

Indian Army-Special Certificate of Education;

1.
2. A pass in the Higher Education Test of the Royal Indian Navy;
3. The  Royal  Indian  Air  Force  Educational  Test  for  re-classification  of  Leading  Air

Craftsmen;

4. The Indian Army Certificate of Education I Class together with (i) a pass in the First
Language Papers of the S.S.L.C (Travancore -Cochin or Kerala) or (ii) a pass in the
V.S.L.C  Examination  (Travancore),  or  (iii)  a  pass  in  the  mother  tongue  as  Second
Language  under  the  old  E.S.L.C.  Scheme  (Travancore);    or  (iv)  a  pass  in  mother
tongue (Malayalam) in the S.S.L.C. Examination under the Madras S.S.L.C Scheme
of 1929 or 1948 or the Cochin S.S.L.C Scheme.

5. Post- Basic School Certificate awarded by a Post-Basic School in any State in India
recognized  by  the  State  Government  concerned  as  equivalent  to  S.S.L.C  /
Matriculation/  Higher  Secondary  Certificate  for  purpose  of  employment  under
them.

(g) Other  qualification  recognized  by  the  State  Government  as  equivalent  to  (a)

above. 

ANNEXURE 
(See rule 15) 

1. For direct recruitment to posts included in the Kerala Last Grade Services.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

Open competition
Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
Open competition
Scheduled Castes
Open competition
Muslims
Open competition
Latin Catholics & Anglo Indians
Open competition
Other Backward Classes

Open competition
Scheduled Castes
Open competition
Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
Open Competition
Muslims
Open competition
Dheevaras
Open competition
Viswakarmas
Open competition
Latin Catholics and Anglo-Indians
Open competition
Scheduled Castes
Open competition
Muslims
Open competition
Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29,  Open competition
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.

Other Backward Classes
Open competition
Scheduled Castes
Open competition
Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
Open competition
Muslims
Open competition
Nadars included in SIUC
Open competition
Other Backward Classes
Open competition
Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
Open competition
Scheduled Tribes
Open competition
Muslims
Open competition
Scheduled Castes converts to Christianity
Open competition
Other Backward Classes
Open competition
Scheduled Castes
Open competition
Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
Open competition
Muslims
Open competition
Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
Open competition
Hindu Nadars
Open competition
Scheduled Castes converts to Christianity
Open competition
Scheduled Castes
Open competition

Muslims
Open competition
Latin Catholics and Anglo-Indians
Open competition
Other Backward Classes
Open competition
Scheduled Castes
Open competition
Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
Open competition
Muslims
Open competition
Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
Open competition
Nadars included in SIUC
Open competition
Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
Open competition
Scheduled Castes
Open competition
Muslims
Open competition
Dheevaras
Open competition
Other Backward Classes
Open competition
Scheduled Tribes
Open competition
Latin Catholic and Anglo-Indians
Open competition
Muslims
Open competition
Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
Open competition

66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.
88.
89.
90.
91.
92.
93.
94.
95.
96.
97.
98.
99.
100. Viswakarmas

Explanation I- 

The  expression  “Other   Backward  Classes”  referred  to  in items  
10, 30, 40, 50, 70 and 90 shall mean Backward Classes referred to 
in item 8 under sub-rule (1) of rule 17. 

Explanation II- 

The  short    fall  in  reservation    for    'Nadars  included  in    SIUC',  and 
'Hindu    Nadars'  occurred  in  the  advice  by  the  Commission  from  the 
ranked lists  published by the Commission on or after the 21st day of 
November, 2009 during the period commencing on and from the 21st 
day of November, 2009 to the date of publication of the Kerala State 
and  Subordinate  Services  (Amendment)  Rules,  2010  in  the  Gazette, 
i.e.  till  the  date  of  commencement  of  this  Explanation,  shall  be
adjusted  in  the  future  vacancies  without  disturbing  the  advices
already made.

For direct recruitment  in posts  other than  those included  in  the  Kerala  Last

II.
Grade Service.

1. Open competition
2. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
3. Open competition
4. Scheduled Castes
5. Open competition
6. Muslims
7. Open competition
8. Latin Catholics & Anglo Indians
9. Open competition
10. Other Backward Classes
11. Open competition
12. Scheduled Castes
13. Open competition
14. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
15. Open competition
16. Muslims
17. Open competition
18. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
19. Open competition
20. Viswakarmas
21. Open competion
22. Latin Catholics and Anglo-Indians
23. Open competition
24. Scheduled Castes
25. Open competition
26. Muslims
27. Open competition
28. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
29. Open competition
30. Muslims
31. Open competition
32. Scheduled Castes
33. Open competition
34. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
35. Open competition
36. Muslims
37. Open competition
38. Nadars included in SIUC
39. Open competition
40. Other Backward Classes
41. Open competition
42. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
43. Open competition
44. Scheduled Tribes
45. Open competition
46. Muslims
47. Open competition
48. Scheduled Castes converts to Christianity
49. Open competition
50. Dheevaras
51. Open competition
52. Scheduled Castes
53. Open competition
54. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas

55. Open competition
56. Muslims
57. Open competition
58. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
59. Open competition
60. Hindu Nadars
61. Open competition
62. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
63. Open competition
64. Scheduled Castes
65. Open competition
66. Muslims
67. Open competition
68. Latin Catholics and Anglo Indians
69. Open competition
70. Viswakarmas
71. Open competition
72. Scheduled Castes
73. Open competion
74. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
75. Open competition
76. Muslims
77. Open competition
78. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
79. Open competition
80. Muslims
81. Open competition
82. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
83. Open competition
84. Scheduled Castes
85. Open competition
86. Muslims
87. Open competition
88. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
89. Open competition
90. Other Backward Classes
91. Open competition
92. Scheduled Tribes
93. Open competition
94. Latin Catholics and Anglo-Indians
95. Open competition
96. Muslims
97. Open competition
98. Ezhavas, Thiyyas and Billavas
99. Open competition

100. Viswakarmas

Explanation 1.- 

The  expression “Other  Backward Classes”  referred  to  in items 10,  
40  and  90  shall mean Backward Classes referred to in item 8 under 
sub-rule (1) of rule 17. 

Explanation II.- 

The short fall in reservation for 'Nadars included in SIUC' and 'Hindu 
Nadars'  occurred  in  the  advice  by  the  Commission  from  the  ranked 
lists  published  by  the  Commission  on  or  after  the  21st  day  of 
November, 2009 during the period commencing on and from the 21st 

day of November, 2009, to the date of publication of the Kerala State 
and  Subordinate  Services  (Amendment)  Rules,  2010  in  the  Gazette, 
i.e.,  till  the  date  of  commencement  of  this  Explanation,  shall  be
adjusted  in  the  future  vacancies  without  disturbing  the  advices
already made.

.............x................x.................. 

